

TO MISS PEABODY


     Wednesday Afternoon, March 6th, 1839

     _My dearest Sophie:_

I had a parting glimpse of you, Monday forenoon, at your window--and
that image abides by me, looking pale, and not so quiet as is your
wont. I have reproached myself many times since, because I did not
show my face, and then we should both have smiled; and so our
reminiscences would have been sunny instead of shadowy. But I believe
I was so intent on seeing you, that I forgot all about the
desirableness of being myself seen. Perhaps, after all, you did see
me--at least you knew that I was there. I fear that you were not quite
well that morning. Do grow better and better--physically, I mean, for
I protest against any spiritual improvement, until I am better able to
keep pace with you--but do be strong, and full of life--earthly
life--and let there be a glow in your cheeks. And sleep soundly the
whole night long, and get up every morning with a feeling as if you
were newly created; and I pray you to lay up a stock of fresh energy
every day till we meet again; so that we may walk miles and miles,
without your once needing to lean upon my arm. Not but what you
_shall_ lean upon it, as much as you choose--indeed, whether you
choose or not--but I would feel as if you did it to lighten my
footsteps, not to support your own. Am I requiring you to work a
miracle within yourself? Perhaps so--yet, not a greater one than I do
really believe might be wrought by inward faith and outward aids. Try
it, my Dove, and be as lightsome on earth as your sister doves are in
the air.

Tomorrow I shall expect a letter from you; but I am almost in doubt
whether to tell you that I expect it; because then your conscience
will reproach you, if you should happen not to have written. I would
leave you as free as you leave me. But I do wonder whether you were
serious in your last letter, when you asked me whether you wrote too
often, and seemed to think that you might thus interfere with my
occupations. My dear Sophie, your letters are no small portion of my
spiritual food, and help to keep my soul alive, when otherwise it
might languish unto death, or else become hardened and earth-incrusted,
as seems to be the case with almost all the souls with whom I am in
daily intercourse. They never interfere with my worldly business--
neither the reading nor the answering them--(I am speaking of your
letters, not of those "earth-incrusted" souls)--for I keep them to be
the treasure of my still and secret hours, such hours as pious people
spend in prayer; and the communion which my spirit then holds with
yours has something of religion in it. The charm of your letters does
not depend upon their intellectual value, though that is great, but on
the spirit of which they are the utterance, and which is a spirit of
wonderful efficacy. No one, whom you would deem worthy of your
friendship, could enjoy so large a share of it as I do, without
feeling the influence of your character throughout his own--purifying
his aims and desires, enabling him to realise that this is a truer
world than the feverish one around us, and teaching him how to gain
daily entrance into that better world. Such, so far as I have been
able to profit by it, has been your ministration to me. Did you dream
what an angelic guardianship was entrusted to you?

March 7th. Your letter did come. You had not the heart to disappoint
me, as I did you, in not making a parting visit, and shall again, by
keeping this letter to send by Mary. But I disappoint you in these two
instances, only that you may consider it a decree of Fate (or of
Providence, which you please) that we shall not meet on the mornings
of my departure, and that my letters shall not come oftener than on
the alternate Saturday. If you will but believe this, you will be
quiet. Otherwise I know that the Dove will flutter her wings, and
often, by necessity, will flutter them in vain. So forgive me, and let
me have my own way, and believe (for it is true) that I never cause
you the slightest disappointment without pain and remorse on my part.
And yet, I know that when you wish me to do any particular thing you
will always tell me so, and that if my sins of omission or commission
should ever wound your heart, you will by no means conceal it.

I did enjoy that walk infinitely--for certainly the enjoyment was not
all finite. And what a heavenly pleasure we might have enjoyed this
very day; the air was so delicious, that it seemed as if the dismal
old Custom House was situated in Paradise; and this afternoon, I sat
with my window open, to temper the glow of a huge coal fire. It
almost seems to me, now, as if beautiful days were wasted and thrown
away, when we do not feel their beauty and heavenliness through one
another.

     Your own friend,

     N. H.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 2d, 1839

     _Mine own Dove_,

I have been sitting by my fireside ever since teatime, till now it is
past eight o'clock; and have been musing and dreaming about a thousand
things, with every one of which, I do believe, some nearer or remoter
thought of you was intermingled. I should have begun this letter
earlier in the evening, but was afraid that some intrusive idler would
thrust himself between us, and so the sacredness of my letter would be
partly lost;--for I feel as if my letters were sacred, because they
are written from my spirit to your spirit. I wish it were possible to
convey them to you by other than earthly messengers--to convey them
directly into your heart, with the warmth of mine still lingering in
them. When we shall be endowed with our spiritual bodies, I think they
will be so constituted, that we may send thoughts and feelings any
distance, in no time at all, and transfuse them warm and fresh into
the consciousness of those whom we love. Oh what a bliss it would be,
at this moment; if I could be conscious of some purer feeling, some
more delicate sentiment, some lovelier fantasy, than could possibly
have had its birth in my own nature, and therefore be aware that my
Dove was thinking through my mind and feeling through my heart!
Try--some evening when you are alone and happy, and when you are most
conscious of loving me and being loved by me--and see if you do not
possess this power already. But, after all, perhaps it is not wise to
intermix fantastic ideas with the reality of our affection. Let us
content ourselves to be earthly creatures, and hold communion of
spirit in such modes as are ordained to us--by letters (dipping our
pens as deep as may be into our hearts) by heartfelt words, when they
can be audible; by glances--through which medium spirits do really
seem to talk in their own language--and by holy kisses, which I do
think have something supernatural in them.

And now good night, my beautiful Dove. I do not write any more at
present, because there are three more whole days before this letter
will visit you: and I desire to talk with you, each of those three
days. Your letter did not come today. Even if it should not come
tomorrow, I shall not imagine that you forget me or neglect me, but
shall heave two or three sighs, and measure salt and coal so much the
more diligently. Good night; and if I have any power, at this
distance, over your spirit, it shall be exerted to make you sleep like
a little baby, till the "Harper of the Golden Dawn" arouse you. Then
you must finish that ode. But do, if you love me, sleep.

April 3d. No letter, my dearest; and if one comes tomorrow I shall not
receive it till Friday, nor perhaps then; because I have a cargo of
coal to measure in East Cambridge, and cannot go to the Custom House
till the job is finished. If you had known this, I think you would
have done your [best] possible to send me a letter today. Doubtless
you have some good reason for omitting it. I was invited to dine at
Mr. Hooper's; with your sister Mary; and the notion came into my head,
that perhaps you would be there,--and though I knew that it could not
be so, yet I felt as if it might. But just as I was going home from
the Custom House to dress, came an abominable person to say that a
measurer was wanted forthwith at East Cambridge; so over I hurried,
and found that, after all, nothing would be done till tomorrow morning
at sunrise. In the meantime, I had lost my dinner, and all other
pleasures that had awaited me at Mr. Hooper's; so that I came back in
very ill humor, and do not mean to be very good-natured again, till my
Dove shall nestle upon my heart again, either in her own sweet person,
or by her image in a letter. But your image will be with me, long
before the letter comes. It will flit around me while I am measuring
coal, and will peep over my shoulder to see whether I keep a correct
account, and will smile to hear my bickerings with the black-faced
demons in the vessel's hold, (they look like the forge-men in Retsch's
Fridolin) and will soothe and mollify me amid all the pester and
plague that is in store for me tomorrow. Not that I would avoid this
pester and plague, even if it were in my power to do so. I need such
training, and ought to have undergone it long ago. It will give my
character a healthy hardness as regards the world; while it will leave
my heart as soft--as fit for a Dove to rest upon--as it is now, or
ever was. Good night again, gentle Dove. I must leave a little space
for tomorrow's record; and moreover, it is almost time that I were
asleep, having to get up in the dusky dawn. Did you yield to my
conjurations, and sleep well last night? Well then, I throw the same
spell over you tonight.

April 4th. Â½ past 9 P.M. I came home late in the afternoon, very
tired, sunburnt and sea-flushed, having walked or sat on the deck of a
schooner ever since sunrise. Nevertheless, I purified myself from the
sable stains of my profession--stains which I share in common with
chimney sweepers--and then hastened to the Custom House to get your
letter--for I _knew_ there was one there awaiting me, and now I thank
you with my whole heart, and will straight way go to sleep. Do you the
same.

April 5th. Your yesterday's letter is received, my beloved Sophie. I
have no time to answer it: but, like all your communications, personal
or written, it is the sunshine of my life. I have been busy all day,
and am now going to see your sister Mary--and I hope, Elizabeth. Mr.
Pickens is going with me.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     Wednesday, April 17th, 1839--4 o'clock P.M.

     _My Dearest_:

If it were not for your sake, I should really be glad of this pitiless
east wind, and should especially bless the pelting rain and
intermingled snowflakes. They have released me from the toils and
cares of office, and given me license to betake myself to my own
chamber; and here I sit by a good coal fire, with at least six or
seven comfortable hours to spend before bed-time. I feel pretty secure
against intruders; for the bad weather will defend me from foreign
invasion; and as to Cousin Haley, he and I had a bitter political
dispute last evening, at the close of which he went to bed in high
dudgeon, and probably will not speak to me these three days. Thus you
perceive that strife and wrangling, as well as east winds and rain,
are the methods of a kind Providence to promote my comfort--which
would not have been so well secured in any other way. Six or seven
hours of cheerful solitude! But I will not be alone. I invite your
spirit to be with me--at any hour and as many hours as you please--but
especially at the twilight hour, before I light my lamp. Are you
conscious of my invitation? I bid you at that particular time, because
I can see visions more vividly in the dusky glow of fire light, than
either by daylight or lamplight. Come--and let me renew my spell
against headache and other direful effects of the east wind. How I
wish I could give you a portion of my insensibility!--And yet I should
be almost afraid of some radical transformation, were I to produce a
change in that respect. God made you so delicately, that it is
especially unsafe to interfere with His workmanship. If my little
Sophie--mine own Dove--cannot grow plump and rosy and tough and
vigorous without being changed into another nature then I do think
that for this short life, she had better remain just what she is. Yes;
but you will always be the same to me, because we have met in
Eternity, and there our intimacy was formed. So get as well as you
possibly can, and be as strong and rosy as you will; for I shall never
doubt that you are the same Sophie who have so often leaned upon my
arm, and needed its superfluous strength.

I _was_ conscious, on those two evenings, of a peacefulness and
contented repose such as I never enjoyed before. You could not have
felt such quiet unless I had felt it too--nor could I, unless you had.
If either of our spirits had been troubled, they were then in such
close communion that both must have felt the same grief and turmoil. I
never, till now, had a friend who could give me repose;--all have
disturbed me; and whether for pleasure or pain, it was still
disturbance, but peace overflows from your heart into mine. Then I
feel that there is a Now--and that Now must be always calm and
happy--and that sorrow and evil are but phantoms that seem to flit
across it.

You must never expect to see my sister E. in the daytime, unless by
previous appointment, or when she goes to walk. So unaccustomed am I
to daylight interviews, that I never imagine her in sunshine; and I
really doubt whether her faculties of life and intellect begin to be
exercised till dusk--unless on extraordinary occasions. Their noon is
at midnight. I wish you could walk with her; but you must not, because
she is indefatigable, and always wants to walk half round the world,
when once she is out of doors.

April 18th. My Dove--my hopes of a long evening of seclusion were not
quite fulfilled; for, a little before nine o'clock John Forrester
and Cousin Haley came in, both of whom I so fascinated with my
delectable conversation, that they did not take leave till after
eleven. Nevertheless, I had already secured no inconsiderable treasure
of enjoyment, with all of which you were intermingled. There has been
nothing to do at the Custom House today; so I came home at two
o'clock, and--went to sleep! Pray Heaven you may have felt a
sympathetic drowsiness, and have yielded to it. My nap has been a
pretty long one, for--as nearly as I can judge by the position of the
sun, it must be as much as five o'clock. I think there will be a
beautiful sunset; and perhaps, if we could walk out together, the wind
would change and the air grow balmy at once. The Spring is not
acquainted with my Dove and me, as the Winter was;--how then can we
expect her to be kindly to us? We really must continue to walk out and
meet her, and make friends with her; then she will salute your cheek
with her balmiest kiss, whenever she gets a chance. As to the east
wind, if ever the imaginative portion of my brain recover from its
torpor, I mean to personify it as a wicked, spiteful, blustering,
treacherous--in short, altogether devilish sort of body, whose
principle of life it is to make as much mischief as he can. The west
wind--or whatever is the gentlest wind of heaven--shall assume your
aspect, and be humanised and angelicised with your traits of
character, and the sweet West shall finally triumph over the fiendlike
East, and rescue the world from his miserable tyranny; and if I tell
the story well, I am sure my loving and beloved West Wind will kiss me
for it.

When this week's first letter came, I held it a long time in my hand,
marvelling at the superscription. How did you contrive to write it?
Several times since, I have pored over it, to discover how much of
yourself was mingled with my share of it; and certainly there is a
grace flung over the fac simile, which was never seen in my harsh,
uncouth autograph--and yet none of the strength is lost. You are
wonderful. Imitate this.

     NATH. HAWTHORNE.

Friday, April 19th. Your Wednesday's letter has come, dearest. Your
letters delight me more than anything, save the sound of your voice;
and I love dearly to write to you--so be at peace on that score. You
_are_ beautiful, my own heart's Dove. Never doubt it again. I shall
really and truly be very glad of the extracts; and they will have a
charm for me that could not otherwise have been. I will imagine your
voice repeating them, tremulously. The _spell_ which you laid upon my
brow will retain its power till we meet again--then it must be
renewed.

What a beautiful day--and I had a double enjoyment of it, for your
sake and my own. I have been to walk this afternoon, to Bunker's Hill
and the Navy Yard, and am tired, because I had not your arm to support
me.

God keep you from East winds and every other evil.

     Mine own Dove's own Friend,

     N. H.

     Â½ past 5 P.M.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 30th, 6 P.M., 1839

     _My beloved_,

Your sweetest of all letters found me at the Custom House, where I had
almost just arrived, having been engaged all the forenoon in measuring
twenty chaldrons of coal--which dull occupation was enlivened by
frequent brawls and amicable discussions with a crew of funny little
Frenchmen from Acadie. I know not whether your letter was a surprise
to me--it seems to me that I had a prophetic faith that the Dove would
visit me--but at any rate, it was a joy, as it always is; for my
spirit turns to you from all trouble and all pleasure. This forenoon I
could not wait as I generally do, to be in solitude before opening
your letter; for I expected to be busy all the afternoon, and was
already tired with working yesterday and today; and my heart longed to
drink your thoughts and feelings, as a parched throat for cold water.
So I pressed the Dove to my lips (turning my head away, so that
nobody saw me) and then broke the seal. I do think it is the dearest
letter you have written, but I think so of each successive one; so you
need not imagine that you have outdone yourself in this instance. How
did I live before I knew you--before I possessed your affection! I
reckon upon your love as something that is to endure when everything
that can perish has perished--though my trust is sometimes mingled
with fear, because I feel myself unworthy of your love. But if I am
worthy of if you will always love me; and if there be anything good
and pure in me, it will be proved by my always loving you.

After dinner. I had to journey over to East Cambridge, expecting to
measure a cargo of coal there; but the vessel had stuck in the mud on
her way thither, so that nothing could be done till tomorrow morning.
It must have been my guardian angel that steered her upon that
mud-bank, for I really needed rest. Did you lead the vessel astray, my
Dove? I did not stop to inquire into particulars, but returned home
forthwith, and locked my door, and threw myself on the bed, with your
letter in my hand. I read it over slowly and peacefully, and then
folding it up, I rested my heart upon it, and fell fast asleep.

Friday, May 3d. 5 P.M. My dearest, ten million occupations and
interruptions, and intrusions, have kept me from going on with my
letter; but my spirit has visited you continually, and yours has come
to me. I have had to be out a good deal in the east winds; but your
spell has proved sovereign against all harm, though sometimes I have
shuddered and shivered for your sake. How have you borne it, my poor
dear little Dove? Have you been able to flit abroad on today's east
wind, and go to Marblehead, as you designed? You will not have seen
Mrs. Hooper, because she came up to Boston in the cars on Monday
morning. I had a brief talk with her, and we made mutual inquiries,
she about you, and I about little C. I will not attempt to tell you
how it rejoices me that we are to spend a whole month together in the
same city. Looking forward to it, it seems to me as if that month
would never come to an end, because there will be so much of eternity
in it. I wish you had read that dream-letter through, and could
remember its contents. I am very sure that it could not have [been]
written by me, however, because I should not think of addressing you
as "My dear Sister"--nor should I like to have you call me
brother--nor even should have liked it, from the very first of our
acquaintance. We are, I trust, kindred spirits, but not brother and
sister. And then what a cold and dry annunciation of that awful
contingency--the "continuance or not of our acquaintance." Mine own
Dove, you are to blame for dreaming such letters, or parts of letters,
as coming from me. It was you that wrote it--not I. Yet I will not
believe that it shows a want of faith in the steadfastness of my
affection, but only in the continuance of circumstances prosperous to
our earthly and external connection. Let us trust in GOD for that.
Pray to GOD for it, my Dove--for you know how to pray better than I
do. Pray, for my sake, that no shadows of earth may ever come between
us, because my only hope of being a happy man depends upon the
permanence of our union. I have great comfort in such thoughts as
those you suggest--that our hearts here draw towards one another so
unusually--that we have not cultivated our friendship, but let it
grow,--that we have thrown ourselves upon one another with such
perfect trust;--and even the deficiency of worldly wisdom, that some
people would ascribe to us in following the guidance of our hearts so
implicitly, is proof to me that there is a deep wisdom within us. Oh,
let us not think but that all will be well! And even if, to worldly
eyes, it should appear that our lot is not a fortunate one, still we
shall have glimpses, at least--and I trust a pervading sunshine--of a
happiness that we could never have found, if we had unquietly
struggled for it, and made our own selection of the means and species
of it, instead of trusting all to something diviner than our reason.

My Dove, there were a good many things that I meant to have written in
this letter; but I have continually lapsed into fits of musing, and
when I have written, the soul of my thoughts has not readily assumed
the earthly garments of language. It is now time to carry the letter
to Mary. I kiss you, dearest--did you feel it? Your own friend,

     NATH. HAWTHORNE, ESQ.

(Dear me! What an effect that Esquire gives to the whole letter!)

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, May 26th, 1839

     _Mine own Self_,

I felt rather dismal yesterday--a sort of vague weight on my spirit--a
sense that something was wanting to me here. What or who could it have
been that I so missed? I thought it not best to go to your house last
evening; so that I have not yet seen Elizabeth--but we shall probably
attend the Hurley-Burley tonight. Would that my Dove might be there!
It seems really monstrous that here, in her own home--or what was her
home, till she found another in my arms--she should no longer be. Oh,
my dearest, I yearn for you, and my heart heaves when I think of
you--(and that is always, but sometimes a thought makes me know and
feel you more vividly than at others, and _that_ I call "thinking of
you")--heaves and swells (my heart does) as sometimes you have felt it
beneath you, when your head was resting on it. At such moments it is
stirred up from its depths. Then our two ocean-hearts mingle their
floods.

I do not believe that this letter will extend to three pages. My
feelings do not, of their own accord, assume words--at least, not a
continued flow of words. I write a few lines, and then I fall a-musing
about many things, which seem to have no connection among themselves,
save that my Dove flits lightly through them all. I feel as if my
being were dissolved and the idea of you were diffused throughout it.
Am I writing nonsense? That is for you to decide. You know what is
Truth--"what is what"--and I should not dare to say to you what I felt
to be other than the Truth--other than the very "what." It is very
singular (but I do not suppose I can express it) that, while I love
you so dearly, and while I am so conscious of the deep embrace of our
spirits, still I have an awe of you that I never felt for anybody
else. Awe is not the word, either; because it might imply something
stern in you--whereas--but you must make it out for yourself. I do
wish that I could put this into words--not so much for your
satisfaction (because I believe you will understand) as for my own. I
suppose I should have pretty much the same feeling if an angel were to
come from Heaven and be my dearest friend--only the angel could not
have the tenderest of human natures too, the sense of which is
mingled with this sentiment. Perhaps it is because in meeting you, I
really meet a spirit, whereas the obstructions of earth have prevented
such a meeting in every other place. But I leave the mystery here.
Some time or other, it may be made plainer to me. But methinks it
converts my love into a religion. And then it is singular, too, that
this awe (or whatever it be) does not prevent me from feeling that it
is I who have the charge of you, and that my Dove is to follow my
guidance and do my bidding. Am I not very bold to say this? And will
not you rebel? Oh no; because I possess the power only so far as I
love you. My love gives me the right, and your love consents to it.

Since writing the above I have been asleep; and I dreamed that I had
been sleeping a whole year in the open air; and that while I slept,
the grass grew around me. It seemed, in my dream, that the very
bed-clothes which actually covered me were spread beneath me, and when
I awoke (in my dream) I snatched them up, and the earth under them
looked black, as if it had been burnt--one square place, exactly the
size of the bedclothes. Yet there was grass and herbage scattered over
this burnt space, looking as fresh, and bright, and dewy, as if the
summer rain and the summer sun had been cherishing them all the
time. Interpret this for me, my Dove--but do not draw any somber omens
from it. What is signified [by] my nap of a whole year? (It made me
grieve to think that I had lost so much of eternity)--and what was the
fire that blasted the spot of earth which I occupied, while the grass
flourished all around?--And what comfort am I to draw from the fresh
herbage amid the burnt space? But it is a silly dream, and you cannot
expound any sense out of it. Generally, I cannot remember what my
dreams have been--only there is a confused sense of having passed
through adventures, pleasurable or otherwise. I suspect that you
mingle with my dreams, but take care to flit away just before I awake,
leaving me but dimly and doubtfully conscious of your visits.

Do you never start so suddenly from a dream that you are afraid to
look round the room, lest your dream-personages (so strong and
distinct seemed their existence, a moment before) should have thrust
themselves out of dream-land into the midst of realities? I do,
sometimes.

I wish I were to see you this evening. How many times have you thought
of me today? All the time?--Or not at all? Did you ever read such a
foolish letter as this? (Here I was interrupted, and have taken a
stroll down on the Neck--a beautiful, beautiful, beautiful sunshine,
and air, and sea. Would that my Dove had been with me. I fear that we
shall perforce lose some of our mutual intimacy with Nature--we walk
together so seldom that she will seem more like a stranger. Would that
I could write such sweet letters to mine own self, as mine own self
writes to me. Good bye, dearest self. Direct yours to

     NATH. HAWTHORNE, ESQ.
     Custom-House, Boston.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     No. 4 Avon Place,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, July 3d, 1839

     _Most beloved Amelia_,

I shall call you so sometimes in playfulness, and so may you; but it
is not the name by which my soul recognizes you. It knows you as
Sophie; but I doubt whether that is the inwardly and intensely dearest
epithet either. I believe that "Dove" is the true word after all; and
it never can be used amiss, whether in sunniest gaiety or shadiest
seriousness. And yet it is a sacred word, and I should not love to
have anybody hear me use it, nor know that GOD has baptised you
so--the baptism being for yourself and me alone. By that name, I
think, I shall greet you when we meet in Heaven. Other dear ones may
call you "daughter," "sister," "Sophia," but when, at your entrance
into Heaven, or after you have been a little while there, you hear a
voice say "Dove!" then you will know that your kindred spirit has been
admitted (perhaps for your sake) to the mansions of rest. That word
will express his yearning for you--then to be forever satisfied; for
we will melt into one another, and be close, close together then. The
name was inspired; it came without our being aware that you were
thenceforth to be my Dove, now and through eternity. I do not
remember, how nor when it alighted on you; the first I knew, it was in
my heart to call you so.

Good night now, my Dove. It is not yet nine o'clock; but I am somewhat
aweary and prefer to muse about you till bedtime, rather than write.

July 5th, Â½ past seven P.M. I must, somehow or other, finish this
letter tonight, my dearest--or else it would not be sent tomorrow; and
then I fear our head would ache, naughty head that it is. My heart
yearns to communicate to you; but if it had any other means at hand,
it certainly would not choose to communicate by the scratchings of an
iron pen, which I am now compelled to use. This must and will
inevitably be a dull letter. Oh how different from yours, which I
received today. You are absolutely inspired, my Dove; and it is not my
poor stupid self that inspires you; for how could I give what is not
in me. I wish I could write to you in the morning, before my toils
begin; but that is impossible, unless I were to write before daylight.
At eventide, my mind has quite lost its elasticity--my heart, even,
is weary--and all that I seem capable of doing is to rest my head on
its pillow and there lay down the burthen of life. I do not mean to
imply that I am unhappy or discontented; for this is not the case; my
life is only a burthen, in the same way that it is so to every
toilsome man, and mine is a healthy weariness, such as needs only a
night's sleep to remove it. But from henceforth forever, I shall be
entitled to call the sons of toil my brethren, and shall know how to
sympathise with them, seeing that I, likewise, have risen at the dawn
and borne the fervor of the mid-day sun, nor turned my heavy footsteps
homeward till eventide. Years hence, perhaps, the experience that my
heart is acquiring now will flow out in truth and wisdom.

You ask me a good many questions, my Dove, and I will answer such of
them as now occur to me; and the rest you may ask me again, when we
meet. First as to your letters. My beloved, you must write whenever
you will--in all confidence that I can never be otherwise than joyful
to receive your letters. Do not get into the habit of trying to find
out, by any method save your own intuition, what is pleasing and what
is displeasing to me. Whenever you need my counsel, or even my
reproof, in any serious matter, you will not fail to receive it; but I
wish my Dove to be as free as a Bird of Paradise. Now, as to this
affair of the letters. I have sometimes been a little annoyed at the
smiles of my brother measurers, who, notwithstanding the masculine
fist of the direction, seem to know that such delicately sealed and
folded epistles can come only from a lady's small and tender hand. But
the annoyance is not on my own account; but because it seems as if the
letters were prophaned by being smiled at--but this is, after all, a
mere fantasy, since the smilers know nothing about my Dove, nor that I
really have a Dove; nor can they be certain that the letters come from
a lady, nor, especially, can they have the remotest imagination what
heavenly letters they are. The sum and substance is, that they are
smiling at nothing; and so it is no matter for their smiles. I would
not give up one letter to avoid the "world's dread laugh,"--much less
to shun the good-natured raillery of three or four people who do not
dream of giving pain. Why has my Dove made me waste so much of my
letter in this talk about nothing?

My dearest, did you really think that I meant to express a doubt
whether we should enjoy each other's society so much, if we could be
together all the time. No, no; for I always feel, that our momentary
and hurried interviews scarcely afford us time to taste the draught of
affection that we drink from one another's hearts. There is a precious
portion of our happiness wasted, because we are forced to enjoy it too
greedily. But I thought, as you do, that there might be more
communication of the intellect, as well as communion of heart, if we
could be oftener together.

Your picture gallery of auxiliary verbs is an admirable fantasy. You
are certainly the first mortal to whom it was given to behold a verb;
though, it seems as if they ought to be visible, being creatures whose
office it is (if I remember my grammar aright) "to be, to do, and to
suffer." Therein is comprehended all that we mortals are capable of.
No; for, according to the definition, verbs do not feel, and cannot
enjoy--they only exist, and act, and are miserable. My Dove and I are
no verbs--or if so, we are passive verbs, and therefore happy ones.

     (Rest of letter missing)

     To Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem,
     Massachusetts.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Monday Eveg July 15th [1839]

     _My blessed Dove_,

Your letter was brought to me at East Cambridge this
afternoon:--otherwise I know not when I should have received it; for I
am so busy that I know not whether I shall have time to go to the
Custom-House these two or three days. I put it in my pocket, and did
not read it till just now, when I could be quiet in my own
chamber--for I always feel as if your letters were too sacred to be
read in the midst of people--and (you will smile) I never read them
without first washing my hands!

And so my poor Dove is sick, and I cannot take her to my bosom. I do
really feel as if I could cure her. [Portion of letter missing] Oh, my
dearest, do let our love be powerful enough to make you well. I will
have faith in its efficacy--not that it will work an immediate
miracle--but it shall make you so well at heart that you cannot
possibly be ill in the body. Partake of my health and strength, my
beloved. Are they not your own, as well as mine? Yes--and your illness
is mine as well as yours; and with all the pain it gives me, the whole
world should not buy my right to share in it.

My dearest, I will not be much troubled, since you tell me (and your
word is always truth) that there is no need. But, oh, be careful of
yourself--remembering how much earthly happiness depends on your
health. Be tranquil--let me be your Peace, as you are mine. Do not
write to me, unless your heart be unquiet, and you think that you can
quiet it by writing.

God bless mine own Dove. I have kissed those three last words. Do you
kiss them too.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     Wednesday eveg. July 17th [1839]

     _My Dearest_,

I did not know but you would like another little note--and I think I
feel a strange impulse to write, now that the whole correspondence
devolves on me. And I wrote my other note in such a hurry, that I
quite forgot to give you the praise which you so deserved, for bearing
up so stoutly against the terrible misfortune of my non-appearance.
Indeed, I do think my Dove is the strongest little dove that ever was
created--never did any creature live, who could feel so acutely, and
yet endure so well.

This note must be a mere word, my beloved--and I wish I could make it
the very tenderest word that ever was spoken or written. Imagine all
that I cannot write.

God bless you, mine own Dove, and make you quite well against I take
you to your home--which shall be on Saturday eveg, without fail. Till
then, dearest, spend your time in happy thoughts and happy
dreams--and let my image be among them. Good bye, mine own Dove--I
have kissed that holy word.

     YOUR OWN, OWN, OWNEST.

My Dove must not look for another note.

     To Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, July 24th, 1839--8 o'clock P.M.

     _Mine own_,

I am tired this evening, as usual, with my long day's toil; and my
head wants its pillow--and my soul yearns for the friend whom God has
given it--whose soul He has married to my soul. Oh, my dearest, how
that thought thrills me! We _are_ married! I felt it long ago; and
sometimes, when I was seeking for some fondest word, it has been on my
lips to call you--"Wife"! I hardly know what restrained me from
speaking it--unless a dread (for _that_ would have been an infinite
pang to me) of feeling you shrink back, and thereby discovering that
there was yet a deep place in your soul which did not know me. Mine
own Dove, need I fear it now? Are we not married? God knows we are.
Often, I have silently given myself to you, and received you for my
portion of human love and happiness, and have prayed Him to consecrate
and bless the union. Yes--we are married; and as God Himself has
joined us, we may trust never to be separated, neither in Heaven nor
on Earth. We will wait patiently and quietly, and He will lead us
onward hand in hand (as He has done all along) like little children,
and will guide us to our perfect happiness--and will teach us when our
union is to be revealed to the world. My beloved, why should we be
silent to one another--why should our lips be silent--any longer on
this subject? The world might, as yet, misjudge us; and therefore we
will not speak to the world; but why should we not commune together
about all our hopes of earthly and external as well [as] our faith of
inward and eternal union? Farewell for tonight, my dearest--my soul's
bride!

July 25th. 8 o'clock, P.M. How does my Dove contrive to live and
thrive, and keep her heart in cheerful trim, through a whole
fortnight, with only one letter from me? It cannot be indifference; so
it must be heroism--and how heroic! It does seem to me that my spirit
would droop and wither like a plant that lacked rain and dew, if it
were not for the frequent shower of your gentle and holy thoughts. But
then there is such a difference in our situations. My Dove is at
home--not, indeed, in her home of homes--but still in the midst of
true affections; and she can live a spiritual life, spiritual and
intellectual. Now, my intellect, and my heart and soul, have no share
in my present mode of life--they find neither labor nor food in it;
everything that I do here might be better done by a machine. I _am_ a
machine, and am surrounded by hundreds of similar machines;--or
rather, all of the business people are so many wheels of one great
machine--and we have no more love or sympathy for one another than if
we were made of wood, brass, or iron, like the wheels of other pieces
of complicated machinery. Perchance--but do not be frightened,
dearest--the soul would wither and die within me, leaving nothing but
the busy machine, no germ for immortality, nothing that could taste of
heaven, if it were not for the consciousness of your deep, deep love,
which is renewed to me with every letter. Oh, my Dove, I have really
thought sometimes, that God gave you to me to be the salvation of my
soul.

     (Rest of letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, July 30th, 8 (or thereabouts) P.M. [1839]

     _Beloved_,

There was no letter from you to-day; and this circumstance, in
connection with your mention of a headache on Sunday, made me
apprehensive that my Dove is not well. Yet surely she would write, or
cause to be written, intelligence of the fact (if fact it were) to the
sharer of her well-being and ill-being. Do, dearest, give me the
assurance that you will never be ill without letting me know, and then
I shall always be at peace, and will not disquiet myself for the
non-reception of a letter; for really, I would not have you crowd your
other duties into too small a space, nor dispense with anything that
it is desirable to do, for the sake of writing to me. If you were not
to write for a whole year, I still should never doubt that you love me
infinitely; and I doubt not that, in vision, dream, or reverie, our
wedded souls would hold communion throughout all that time.
Therefore I do not ask for letters while you are well, but leave all
to your own heart and judgment; but if anything, bodily or mental,
afflicts my Dove, her beloved _must_ be told.

And why was my dearest wounded by that silly sentence of mine about
"indifference"? It was not well that she should do anything but smile
at it. I knew, just as certainly as your own heart knows, that my
letters are very precious to you--had I been less certain of it, I
never could have trifled upon the subject. Oh, my darling, let all
your sensibilities be healthy--never, never, be wounded by what ought
not to wound. Our tenderness should make us mutually susceptible of
happiness from every act of each other, but of pain from none; our
mighty love should scorn all little annoyances, even from the object
of that love. What misery (and what ridiculous misery too) would it
be, if, because we love one another better than all the universe
besides, our only gain thereby were a more exquisite sensibility to
pain for the beloved hand and a more terrible power of inflicting it!
Dearest, it never shall be so with us. We will have such an infinity
of mutual faith, that even real offenses (should they ever occur)
shall not wound, because we know that something external from yourself
or myself must be guilty of the wrong, and never our essential
selves. My beloved wife, there is no need of all this preachment now;
but let us both meditate upon it, and talk to each other about it;--so
shall there never come any cloud across our inward bliss--so shall one
of our hearts never wound the other, and itself fester with the sore
that it inflicts. And I speak now, when my Dove is not wounded nor
sore, because it is easier than it might be hereafter, when some
careless and wayward act or word of mine may have rubbed too roughly
against her tenderest of hearts. Dearest, I beseech you grant me
freedom to be careless and wayward--for I have had such freedom all my
life. Oh, let me feel that I may even do you a little wrong without
your avenging it (oh how cruelly) by being wounded.

     (Rest of letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Custom House_, August 8th, 1839

Your letter, my beloved wife, was duly received into your husband's
heart yesterday. I found it impossible to keep it all day long, with
unbroken seal, in my pocket; and so I opened and read it on board of a
salt vessel, where I was at work, amid all sorts of bustle, and gabble
of Irishmen, and other incommodities. Nevertheless its effect was very
blessed, even as if I had gazed upward from the deck of the vessel,
and beheld my wife's sweet face looking down upon me from a
sun-brightened cloud. Dearest, if your dove-wings will not carry you
so far, I beseech you to alight upon such a cloud sometimes, and let
it bear you to me. True it is, that I never look heavenward without
thinking of you, and I doubt whether it would much surprise me to
catch a glimpse of you among those upper regions. Then would all that
is spiritual within me so yearn towards you, that I should leave my
earthly incumbrances behind, and float upward and embrace you in the
heavenly sunshine. Yet methinks I shall be more content to spend a
lifetime of earthly and heavenly happiness intermixed. So human am I,
my beloved, that I would not give up the hope of loving and cherishing
you by a fireside of our own, not for any unimaginable bliss of higher
spheres. Your influence shall purify me and fit me for a better
world--but it shall be by means of our happiness here below.

Was such a rhapsody as the foregoing ever written in the Custom House
before? I have almost felt it a sin to write to my Dove here, because
her image comes before me so vividly--and the place is not worthy of
it. Nevertheless, I cast aside my scruples, because, having been awake
ever since four o'clock this morning (now thirteen hours) and abroad
since sunrise, I shall feel more like holding intercourse in dreams
than with my pen, when secluded in my room. I am not quite hopeless,
now, of meeting you in dreams. Did you not know, beloved, that I
dreamed of you, as it seemed to me, all night long, after that last
blissful meeting? It is true, when I looked back upon the dream, it
immediately became confused; but it had been vivid, and most happy,
and left a sense of happiness in my heart. Come again, sweet wife!
Force your way through the mists and vapors that envelope my
slumbers--illumine me with a radiance that shall not vanish when I
awake. I throw my heart as wide open to you as I can. Come and rest
within it, Dove.

Oh, how happy you make me by calling me your husband--by subscribing
yourself my wife. I kiss that word when I meet it in your letters; and
I repeat over and over to myself, "she is my wife--I am her husband."
Dearest, I could almost think that the institution of marriage was
ordained, first of all, for you and me, and for you and me alone; it
seems so fresh and new--so unlike anything that the people around us
enjoy or are acquainted with. Nobody ever had a wife but me--nobody a
husband, save my Dove. Would that the husband were worthier of his
wife; but she loves him--and her wise and prophetic heart could never
do so if he were utterly unworthy.

_My own Room._ August 9th--about 10 A.M. It is so rare a thing for
your husband to find himself in his own room in the middle of the
forenoon, that he cannot help advising his Dove of that remarkable
fact. By some misunderstanding, I was sent on a fruitless errand to
East Cambridge, and have stopped here, on my return to the Custom
House, to rest and refresh myself--and what can so rest and refresh me
as to hold intercourse with my darling wife? It must be but a word and
a kiss, however--a written word and a shadowy kiss. Good bye, dearest.
I must go now to hold controversy, I suppose, with some plaguy little
Frenchman about a peck of coal more or less; but I will give my
beloved another word and kiss, when the day's toil is over.

_About 8 o'clock P.M._--I received your letter, your sweet, sweet
letter, my sweetest wife, on reaching the Custom House. Now as to that
swelled face of ours--it had begun to swell when we last met; but I
did not tell you, because I knew that you would associate the idea of
pain with it, whereas, it was attended with no pain at all. Very glad
am I, that my Dove did not see me when one side of my face was swollen
as big as two, for the image of such a monstrous one-sidedness, or
double-sidedness, might have haunted her memory through the whole
fortnight. Dearest, is it a weakness that your husband wishes to look
tolerably comely always in your eyes?--and beautiful if he could!! My
Dove is beautiful, and full of grace; she should not have an ugly
mate. But to return to this "naughty swelling"--it began to subside
on Tuesday, and has now, I think, entirely disappeared, leaving my
visage in its former admirable proportion. Nothing is now the matter
with me; save that my heart is as much swollen as my cheek
was--swollen with love, with pent-up love, which I would fain mingle
with the heart-blood of mine own sweet wife. Oh, dearest, how much I
have to say to you!--how many fond thoughts.

Dearest, I dare not give you permission to go out in the east winds.
The west wind will come very often I am sure, if it were only for the
sake of my Dove. Have nothing to do with that hateful east wind.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, August 21st, 1839

My dearest will be glad to know that her husband has not had to endure
the heavy sunshine this afternoon;--he came home at three o'clock or
thereabout, and locking the door, betook himself to sleep--first
ensuring himself sweet slumber and blissful dreams (if any dreams
should come) by reperusing his sweet wife's letter. His wife was with
him at the moment of falling asleep, and at the moment of awaking; but
she stole away from him during the interval. Naughty wife!
Nevertheless, he has slept and is refreshed--slept how long he does
not know; but the sun has made a far progress downward, since he
closed his eyes.

Oh, my wife, if it were possible that you should vanish from me, I
feel and know that my soul would be solitary forever and ever. I
almost think that there would be no "forever" for me. I could not
encounter such a desolate Eternity, were you to leave me. You are my
first hope and my last. If you fail me (but there is no such if) I
might toil onward through this life without much outward change, but I
should sink down and die utterly upon the threshold of the dreary
Future. Were _you_ to find yourself deceived, you would betake
yourself at once to God and Heaven, in the certainty of there finding
a thousand-fold recompense for all earthly disappointment; but with
me, it seems as if hope and happiness would be torn up by the roots,
and could never bloom again, neither in this soil nor the soil of
Paradise.

August 22d. Five or six o'clock P.M. I was interrupted by the supper
bell, while writing the foregoing sentence; and much that I might have
added has now passed out of my mind--or passed into its depths. My
beloved wife, let us make no question about our love, whether it be
true. Were it otherwise, God would not have left your heart to wreck
itself utterly--His angels keep watch over you--they would have given
you early and continued warning of the approach of Evil in any shape.

Two letters has my Dove blessed me with, since that of Monday--both
beautiful--all three, indeed, most beautiful. There is a great deal in
all of them that should be especially answered; but how may this be
effected in one little sheet?--moreover, it is my pleasure to write
in a more desultory fashion.

Nevertheless, propound as many questions as you see fit, in your
letters, but, dearest, let it be without expectation of a set
response.

When I first looked at that shadow of the Passing Hour, I thought her
expression too sad; but the more I looked the sweeter and pleasanter
it grew--and now I am inclined to think that few mortals are waited on
by happier Hours than is my Dove, even in her pensive moods. My
beloved, you make a Heaven round about you, and dwell in it
continually; and as it is your Heaven, so is it mine. My heart has not
been very heavy--not desperately heavy--any one time since I loved
you; not even your illness and headaches, dearest wife, can make me
desperately sad. My stock of sunshine is so infinitely increased by
partaking of yours, that even when a cloud flits by, I incomparably
prefer its gloom to the sullen, leaden tinge that used to overspread
my sky. Were you to bring me, in outward appearance, nothing save a
load of grief and pain, yet I do believe that happiness, in no stinted
measure, would somehow or other be smuggled into the dismal burthen.
But you come to me with no grief--no pain--you come with flowers of
Paradise; some in bloom, many in the bud, and all of them immortal.

August 23d--between 7 and 8 P.M. Dearest wife, when I think how soon
this letter will greet you, it makes my heart yearn towards you so
much the more. How much of life we waste! Oh, beloved, if we had but a
cottage somewhere beyond the sway of the east wind, yet within the
limits of New England, where we could be always together, and have a
place to _be_ in--what could we desire more? Nothing--save daily
bread, (or rather bread and milk, for I think I should adopt your
diet) and clean white apparel every day for mine unspotted Dove. Then
how happy I would be--and how good! I could not be other than good and
happy, when your kiss would sanctify me at all my outgoings and
incomings. And you should draw, and paint, and sculpture, and make
music, and poetry too, and your husband would admire and criticise;
and I, being pervaded with your spirit, would write beautifully and
make myself famous for your sake, because perhaps you would like to
have the world acknowledge me--but if the whole world glorified me
with one voice, it would be a meed of little value in comparison with
my wife's smile and kiss. For I shall always read my manuscripts to
you, in the summer afternoons or winter evenings; and if they please
you I shall expect a smile and a kiss as my reward--and if they do not
please, I must have a smile and kiss to comfort me.

Good bye--sweet, sweet, dear, dear, sweetest, dearest wife. I received
the kiss you sent me and have treasured it up in my heart. Take one
from your own husband.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. A. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, August 25th, 1839

     _Dearest Wife_,

I did not write you yesterday, for several reasons--partly because
I was interrupted by company; and also I had a difficult letter
to project and execute in behalf of an office-seeker; and in
the afternoon I fell asleep amid thoughts of my own Dove; and
when I awoke, I took up Miss Martineau's Deerbrook, and became
interested in it--because, being myself a lover, nothing that treats
earnestly of love can be indifferent to me. Some truth in the book
I recognised--but there seems to be too much of dismal fantasy.

Thus, one way or another, the Sabbath passed away without my pouring
out my heart to my sweet wife on paper; but I thought of you, dearest,
all day long. Your letter came this forenoon, and I opened it on board
of a salt-ship, and snatched portions of it in the intervals of
keeping tally. Every letter of yours is as fresh and new as if you had
never written a preceding one--each is like a strain of music unheard
before, yet all are in sweet accordance--all of them introduce me
deeper and deeper into your being, yet there is no sense of surprise
at what I see, and feel, and know, therein. I am familiar with your
inner heart, as with my home; but yet there is a sense of
revelation--or perhaps of recovered intimacy with a dearest friend
long hidden from me. Were you not my wife in some past eternity?

Dearest, perhaps these speculations are not wise. We will not cast
dreamy glances too far behind us or before us, but live our present
life in simplicity; for methinks that is the way to realise it most
intensely. Good night, most beloved. Your husband is presently going
to bed; for the bell has just rung (those bells are always
interrupting us, whether for dinner, or supper, or bed-time) and he
rose early this morning, and must be abroad at sunrise tomorrow. Good
night, my wife. Receive your husband's kiss upon your eyelids.

August 27th. Â½ past 7 o'clock. Very dearest, your husband has been
stationed all day at the end of Long Wharf, and I rather think that he
had the most eligible situation of anybody in Boston. I was aware that
it must be intensely hot in the middle of the city; but there was only
a very short space of uncomfortable heat in my region, half-way
towards the center of the harbour; and almost all the time there was a
pure and delightful breeze, fluttering and palpitating, sometimes
shyly kissing my brow, then dying away, and then rushing upon me in
livelier sport, so that I was fain to settle my straw hat tighter upon
my head. Late in the afternoon, there was a sunny shower, which came
down so like a benediction, that it seemed ungrateful to take shelter
in the cabin, or to put up an umbrella. Then there was a rainbow, or a
large segment of one, so exceedingly brilliant, and of such long
endurance, that I almost fancied it was stained into the sky, and
would continue there permanently. And there were clouds floating all
about, great clouds and small, of all glorious and lovely hues (save
that imperial crimson, which was never revealed save to our united
gaze) so glorious, indeed, and so lovely, that I had a fantasy of
Heaven's being broken into fleecy fragments, and dispersed
throughout space, with its blessed inhabitants yet dwelling blissfully
upon those scattered islands. Oh, how I do wish that my sweet wife and
I could dwell upon a cloud, and follow the sunset round about the
earth! Perhaps she might; but my nature is too earthy to permit me to
dwell there with her--and I know well that she would not leave me
here. Dearest, how I longed for you to be with me, both in the shower
and the sunshine. I did but half see what was to be seen, nor but half
feel the emotions which the scene ought to have produced. Had you been
there, I do think that we should have remembered this among our most
wondrously beautiful sunsets. And the sea was very beautiful too.
Would it not be a pleasant life to--but I will not sketch out any more
fantasies tonight.

Beloved, have not I been gone a great while? Truly it seems to me very
long; and it [is] strange what an increase of apparent length is
always added by two or three days of the second week. Do not you yearn
to see me? I know you do, dearest. How do I know it? How should I,
save by my own heart?

Dearest wife, I am tired now, and have scribbled this letter in such
slovenly fashion that I fear you will hardly be able to read
it--nevertheless, I have been happy in writing it. But now, though it
is so early yet, I shall throw aside my pen, especially as the paper
is so nearly covered.

My sweet Dove,

     Good night.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, September 23d 1839. Â½ past 6 P.M.

Belovedest little wife--sweetest Sophie Hawthorne--what a delicious
walk that was, last Thursday! It seems to me, now, as it I could
really remember every footstep of it. It is almost as distinct as the
recollection of those walks, in which my earthly form did really tread
beside your own, and my arm upheld you; and, indeed, it has the same
character as those heavenly ramblings;--for did we tread on earth ever
then? Oh no--our souls went far away among the sunset clouds, and
wherever there was ethereal beauty, there were we, our true selves;
and it was there we grew into each other, and became a married pair.
Dearest, I love to date our marriage as far back as possible, and I
feel sure that the tie had been formed, and our union had become
indissoluble, even before we sat down together on the steps of the
"house of spirits." How beautiful and blessed those hours appear to
me! True; we are far more conscious of our relation, and therefore
infinitely happier, now, than we were then; but still those
remembrances are among the most precious treasures of my soul. It is
not past happiness; it makes a portion of our present bliss. And thus,
doubtless, even amid the joys of Heaven, we shall love to look back to
our earthly bliss, and treasure it forever in the sum of an infinitely
accumulating happiness. Perhaps not a single pressure of the hand, not
a glance, not a sweet and tender tone, but will be repeated sometime
or other in our memory.

Oh, dearest, blessedest Dove, I never felt sure of going to Heaven,
till I knew that you loved me; but now I am conscious of God's love in
your own. And now, good bye for a little while, mine own wife. I
thought it was just on the verge of supper-time when I began to
write--and there is the bell now. I was beginning to fear that it had
rung unheard while I was communing with my Dove. Should we be the more
ethereal, if we did not eat? I have a most human and earthly
appetite.

Mine own wife, since supper I have been reading over again (for the
third time--the two first being aboard my saltship--the Marcia
Cleaves) your letter of yesterday--and a dearest letter it is--and
meeting with Sophie Hawthorne twice, I took the liberty to kiss her
very fervently. Will she forgive me? Do know yourself by that name,
dearest, and think of yourself as Sophie Hawthorne? It thrills my
heart to write it, and still more, I think, to read it in the fairy
letters of your own hand. Oh, you are my wife, my dearest, truest,
tenderest, most beloved wife. I would not be disjoined from you for a
moment, for all the world. And how strong, while I write, is the
consciousness that I am truly your husband!

My little Dove. I have observed that butterflies--very broad-winged
and magnificent butterflies--frequently come on board of the salt ship
when I am at work. What have these bright strangers to do on Long
Wharf, where there are no flowers or any green thing--nothing but
brick stores, stone piles, black ships, and the bustle of toilsome
men, who neither look up to the blue sky, nor take note of these
wandering gems of air. I cannot account for them, unless, dearest,
they are the lovely fantasies of your mind, which you send thither
in search of me. There is the supper-bell. Good-bye, darling.

Sept. 25th. Morning.--Dove, I have but a single moment to embrace you.
Tell Sophie Hawthorne I love her. Has she a partiality for her own,
own

     HUSBAND.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Custom House_, October 10th, 1839--Â½ past 2 P.M.

Belovedest, your two precious letters have arrived--the first
yesterday forenoon, the second today. In regard to the first, there
was a little circumstance that affected me so pleasantly, that I
cannot help telling my sweetest wife of it. I had read it over three
times, I believe, and was reading it again, towards evening in my
room; when I discovered, in a remote region of the sheet, two or three
lines which I had not before seen, and which Sophie Hawthorne had
signed with her own name. It is the strangest thing in the world that
I had not read them before--but certainly it was a happy accident;
for, finding them so unexpectedly, when I supposed that I already had
the whole letter by heart, it seemed as if there had been a sudden
revelation of my Dove--as if she had stolen into my room (as, in her
last epistle, she dreams of doing) and made me sensible of her
presence at that very moment. Dearest, since writing the above, I
have been interrupted by some official business; for I am at present
filling the place of Colonel Hall as head of the measurers'
department--which may account for my writing to you from the Custom
House. It is the most ungenial place in the whole world to write a
love-letter in:--not but what my heart is full of love, here as
elsewhere: but it closes up, and will not give forth its treasure now.

I do wish mine own Dove had been with me, on my last passage to
Boston. We should assuredly have thought that a miracle had been
wrought in our favor--that Providence had put angelic sentinels round
about us, to ensure us the quiet enjoyment of our affection--for, as
far as Lynn, I was actually the sole occupant of the car in which I
had seated myself. What a blissful solitude would that have been, had
my whole self been there! Then would we have flown through space like
two disembodied spirits--two or one. Are we singular or plural,
dearest? Has not each of us a right to use the first person singular,
when speaking in behalf of our united being? Does not "I," whether
spoken by Sophie Hawthorne's lips or mine, express the one spirit of
myself and that darlingest Sophie Hawthorne? But what a wilful little
person she is! Does she still refuse my Dove's proffer to kiss her
cheek? Well--I shall contrive some suitable punishment: and if my Dove
cannot kiss her, I must undertake the task in person. What a painful
duty it will be!

October 11th--Â½ past 4 P.M. Did my Dove fly in with me in my chamber
when I entered just now? If so, let her make herself manifest to me
this very moment, for my heart needs her presence.--You are not here
dearest. I sit writing in the middle of the chamber, opposite the
looking-glass; and as soon as I finish this sentence, I shall look
therein--and really I have something like a shadowy notion, that I
shall behold mine own white Dove peeping over my shoulder. One moment
more--I defer the experiment as long as possible, because there is a
pleasure in the slight tremor of the heart that this fantasy has
awakened. Dearest, if you can make me sensible of your presence, do it
now!--Oh, naughty, naughty Dove! I have looked, and saw nothing but my
own dark face and beetle-brow. How could you disappoint me so? Or is
it merely the defect in my own eyes, which cannot behold the
spiritual? My inward eye can behold you, though but dimly. Perhaps,
beloved wife, you did not come when I called, because you mistook the
locality whence the call proceeded. You are to know, then, that I
have removed from my old apartment, which was wanted as a parlor by
Mr. and Mrs. Devens, and am now established in a back chamber--a
pleasant enough and comfortable little room. The windows have a better
prospect than those of my former chamber, for I can see the summit of
the hill on which Gardner Greene's estate was situated; it is the
highest point of the city, and the boys at play on it are painted
strongly against the sky. No roof ascends as high as this--nothing but
the steeple of the Park-street church, which points upward behind it.
It is singular that such a hill should have been suffered to remain so
long, in the very heart of the city; it affects me somewhat as if a
portion of the original forest were still growing here. But they are
fast digging it away now; and if they continue their labors, I shall
soon be able to see the Park-street steeple as far downward as the
dial. Moreover, in another direction, I can see the top of the dome of
the State-House; and if my Dove were to take wing and alight there
(the easiest thing in the world for a dove to do) she might look
directly into my window, and see me writing this letter. I glance
thither as I write, but can see no Dove there.

(Rest of letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, October 3d, 1839. Â½ past 7 P.M.

     _Ownest Dove_;

Did you get home safe and sound, and with a quiet and happy heart?
Providence acted lovingly toward us on Tuesday evening, allowing us to
meet in the wide desert of this world, and mingle our spirits. It
would have seemed all a vision then, now we have the symbol of its
reality. You looked like a vision, beautifullest wife, with the width
of the room between us--so spiritual that my human heart wanted to be
assured that you had an earthly vesture on. What beautiful white doves
those were, on the border of the vase; are they of mine own Dove's
kindred? Do you remember a story of a cat who was changed into a
lovely lady?--and on her bridal night, a mouse happened to run across
the floor; and forthwith the cat-wife leaped out of bed to catch it.
What if mine own Dove, in some woeful hour for her poor husband,
should remember her dove-instincts, and spread her wings upon the
western breeze, and return to him no more! Then would he stretch out
his arms, poor wingless biped, not having the wherewithal to fly, and
say aloud--"Come back, naughty Dove!--whither are you going?--come
back, and fold your wings upon my heart again, or it will freeze!" And
the Dove would flutter her wings, and pause a moment in the air,
meditating whether or no she should come back: for in truth, as her
conscience would tell her, this poor mortal had given her all he had
to give--a resting-place on his bosom--a home in his deepest heart.
But then she would say to herself--"my home is in the gladsome
air--and if I need a resting-place, I can find one on any of the
sunset-clouds. He is unreasonable to call me back; but if he can
follow me, he may!" Then would the poor deserted husband do his best
to fly in pursuit of the faithless Dove; and for that purpose would
ascend to the topmast of a salt-ship, and leap desperately into the
air, and fall down head-foremost upon the deck, and break his neck.
And there should be engraven on his tombstone--"Mate not thyself with
a Dove, unless thou hast wings to fly."

Now will my Dove scold at me for this foolish flight of fancy;--but
the fact is, my goose quill flew away with me. I do think that I
have gotten a bunch of quills from the silliest flock of geese on
earth. But the rest of the letter shall be very sensible. I saw Mr.
Howes in the reading-room of [the] Athenaeum, between one and two
o'clock to-day; for I happened to have had leisure for an early
dinner, and so was spending a half-hour turning over the periodicals.
He spoke of the long time since your husband had been at his house;
and so I promised, on behalf of that respectable personage, that he
would spend an evening there on his next visit to Salem. But if I had
such a sweetest wife as your husband has, I doubt whether I could find
[it] in my heart to keep the engagement. Now, good night, truest Dove
in the world. You will never fly away from me; and it is only the
infinite impossibility of it that enables me to sport with the idea.

Dearest, there was an illegible word in your yesterday's note. I have
pored over it, but cannot make it out. Your words are too precious to
be thus hidden under their own vesture. Good night, wife!

October 4th.--5 or thereabout P.M. Mine own Dove, I dreamed the
queerest dreams last night, about being deserted, and all such
nonsense--so you see how I was punished for that naughty nonsense of
the Faithless Dove. It seems to me that my dreams are generally about
fantasies, and very seldom about what I really think and feel. You did
not appear visibly in my last night's dreams: but they were made up of
desolation; and it was good to awake, and know that my spirit was
forever and irrevocably linked with the soul of my truest and
tenderest Dove. You have warmed my heart, mine own wife: and never
again can I know what it is to be cold and desolate, save in dreams.
You love me dearly--don't you?

And so my Dove has been in great peril since we parted. No--I do not
believe she was; it was only a shadow of peril, not a reality. My
spirit cannot anticipate any harm to you, and I trust you to God with
securest faith. I know not whether I could endure actually to see you
in danger: but when I hear of any risk--as, for instance, when your
steed seemed to be on the point of dashing you to pieces (but I do
quake a little at that thought) against a tree--my mind does not seize
upon it as if it had any substance. Believe me, dearest, the tree
would have stood aside to let you pass, had there been no other means
of salvation. Nevertheless, do not drive your steed against trees
wilfully. Mercy on us, what a peril that was of the fat woman, when
she "smashed herself down" beside my Dove! Poor Dove! Did you not feel
as if an avalanche had all but buried you. I can see my Dove at this
moment, my slender, little delicatest white Dove, squeezed almost out
of Christendom by that great mass of female flesh--that ton of
woman--that beef-eater and beer-guzzler, whose immense cloak, though
broad as a ship's mainsail, could not be made to meet in front--that
picture of an ale-wife--that triple, quadruple, dozen-fold old lady.

Will not my Dove confess that there is a little _nonsense_ in this
epistle? But be not wroth with me, darling wife;--my heart sports with
you because it loves you.

If you happen to see Sophie Hawthorne, kiss her cheek for my sake. I
love her full as well as I do mine own wife. Will that satisfy her, do
you think? If not, she is a very unreasonable little person.

It is my chiefest pleasure to write to you, dearest.

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, October 23d, 1839--Â½ past 7 P.M.

     _Dear little Dove_,

Here sits your husband, comfortably established for the evening in his
own domicile, with a cheerful coal fire making the room a little too
warm. I think I like to be a very little too warm. And now if my Dove
were here, she and that naughty Sophie Hawthorne, how happy we all
three--two--one--(how many are there of us?)--how happy might we be!
Dearest, it will be a yet untasted bliss, when, for the first time, I
have you in a domicile of my own, whether it be in a hut or a palace,
a splendid suit of rooms or an attic chamber. Then I shall feel as if
I had brought my wife home at last. Shall Sophie Hawthorne be there
too? Yes, mine own Dove, whether you like it or no. You would wonder,
were I to tell you how absolutely necessary she has contrived to
render herself to your husband. His heart stirs at her very name--even
at the thought of her unspoken name. She is his sunshine--she is a
happy smile on the visage of his Destiny, causing that stern personage
to look as benign as Heaven itself. And were Sophie Hawthorne a tear
instead of a smile, still your foolish husband would hold out his
heart to receive that tear within it, and doubtless would think it
more precious than all the smiles and sunshine in the world. But
Sophie Hawthorne has bewitched him--for there is great reason to
suspect that she deals in magic. Sometimes, while your husband
conceives himself to be holding his Dove in his arms, lo and behold!
there is the arch face of Sophie Hawthorne peeping up at him. And
again, in the very midst of Sophie Hawthorne's airs, while he is
meditating what sort of chastisement would suit her misdemeanors, all
of a sudden he becomes conscious of his Dove, with her wings folded
upon his heart to keep it warm. Methinks a woman, or angel (yet let it
be a woman, because I deem a true woman holier than an angel)--
methinks a woman, then, who should combine the characteristics of
Sophie Hawthorne and my Dove would be the very perfection of her race.
The heart would find all it yearns for, in such a woman, and so would
the mind and the fancy;--when her husband was lightsome of spirit,
her merry fantasies would dance hand in hand with his; and when he
was overburthened with cares he would rest them all upon her bosom.

Dearest, your husband was called on by Mr. Hillard yesterday, who said
that he intended soon to take a house in Boston, and, in that case,
would like to take your respectable spouse to lodge and breakfast.
What thinks my Dove of this? Your husband is quite delighted, because
he thinks matters may be managed so that once in a while he may meet
his own wife within his own premises. Might it not be so? Or would his
wife--most preposterous idea!--deem it a sin against decorum to pay a
visit to her husband? Oh, no, belovedest. Your unreserve, your
out-gushing frankness, is one of the loveliest results of your purity,
and innocence, and holiness. And now good night, wife worshipful and
beloved. Amid many musings, nine o'clock has surprised me at this
stage of my epistle.

October 24th.--Â½ past 6 P.M. Dearest Dove, your letter came to-day;
and I do think it the sweetest of all letters--but you must not
therefore suppose that you have excelled yourself; for I think the
same of each successive one. My dearest, what a delightful scene was
that between Sophie Hawthorne and my Dove, when the former rebelled
so stoutly against Destiny, and the latter, with such meek
mournfulness, submitted. Which do I love the best, I wonder--my Dove,
or my little Wild-Flower? I love each best, and both equally; and my
heart would inevitably wither and dry up, and perish utterly, if
either of them were torn away from it. Yet, truly I have reason to
apprehend more trouble with Sophie Hawthorne than with my Dove.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Custom House_, Novr. 14th [1839]

     _My dearest Wife_,

May God sustain you under this affliction. I have long dreaded it for
your sake. Oh, let your heart be full of love for me now, and realise
how entirely my happiness depends on your well-being. You are not your
own, dearest--you must not give way to grief. Were it possible, I
would come to see you now.

I will write you again on Saturday.

     YOUR OWN HUSBAND.

My dearest, this note seems cold and lifeless to me, as if there were
no tenderness nor comfort in it. Think for yourself all that I cannot
speak.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Novr. 15th--very late [1839]

Dearest and best wife, I meant to have written you a long letter this
evening; but an indispensable and unexpected engagement with Gen.
M'Neil has prevented me. Belovedest, your yesterday's letter was
received; and gave me infinite comfort. Yet, Oh, be prepared for the
worst--if this may be called worst, which is in truth best for
all--and more than all for George. I cannot help trembling for you,
dearest. God bless you and keep you.

I will write a full letter in a day or two. Meantime, as your husband
is to rise with peep of day tomorrow, he must betake him to his
mattress. Good night, dearest.

     YOUR OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Salem.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Nov. 17, 1839--6 P.M. or thereabout.

I received no letter from my sweetest wife yesterday; and my heart is
not quite at ease about her. Dearest, I pray to God for you--and I
pray to yourself, too; for methinks there is within you a divine and
miraculous power to counteract all sorts of harm. Oh be strong for the
sake of your husband. Let all your love for me be so much added to the
strength of your heart. Remember that your anguish must likewise be
mine. Not that I would have it otherwise, mine own wife--your sorrows
shall be just as precious a possession to me as your joys.

Dearest, if you could steal in upon your husband now, you would see a
comfortable sight. I wish you would make a sketch of me, here in our
own parlour; and it might be done without trusting entirely to
imagination, as you have seen the room and the furniture--and (though
that would be the least important item of the picture) you have seen
myself. I am writing now at my new bureau, which stands between the
windows; there are two lamps before me, which show the polished
shadings of the mahogany panels to great advantage. A coal fire is
burning in the grate--not a very fervid one, but flickering up
fitfully, once in a while, so as to remind me that I am by my own
fireside. I am sitting in the cane-bottomed rocking-chair (wherein my
Dove once sate, but which did not meet her approbation); and another
hair-cloth arm-chair stands in front of the fire. Would that I could
look round with the assurance of seeing mine own white Dove in it! Not
that I want to see her apparition--nor to have her brought here by
miracle, but I want that full assurance of peace and joy, which I
should have if my belovedest wife were near me in our own parlor.

Sophie Hawthorne, what a beautiful carpet did you choose for me! I
admire it so much that I can hardly bear to tread upon it. It is fit
only to be knelt upon; and I do kneel on it sometimes. As you saw it
only in narrow strips, I doubt whether even you can imagine what an
effect is produced by the tout ensemble, spreading its fantastic
foliage, or whatever it is, all over the floor. Many times today have
I found myself gazing at it; and I am almost tempted to call in people
from the street to help me admire it worthily. But perhaps they
would not quite sympathize with my raptures. I am doubtless somewhat
more alive to the merits of this carpet, because it was your choice,
and is our mutual property. My Dove, there is an excellent place for a
bust over the bookcase which surmounts my bureau; some time or other,
I shall behold a creation of your own upon it. At present, I have no
work of art to adorn our parlour with, except an allumette-holder, on
the mantel-piece ornamented with drawings from Flaxman. It was given
me by Elizabeth; and, considerably to my vexation, one of the glasses
has been broken, during the recent removal of my household gods.

My wife, I like sleeping on a mattress better than on a feather-bed.
It is a pity, however, that a mattress looks so lean and lank;--it
certainly does not suggest such ideas of comfort and downy repose as a
well-filled feather-bed does; but my sleep, I think, is of better
quality, though, indeed, there was nothing to complain of on that
score, even while I reposed on feathers. You need not be afraid of my
smothering in the little bed-room; for I always leave the door open,
so that I have the benefit of the immense volume of air in the
spacious parlor.

Mrs. Hillard takes excellent care of me, and feeds [me] with eggs
and baked apples and other delectable dainties; and altogether I am as
happily situated as a man can be, whose heart is wedded, while
externally he is still a bachelor.

My wife, would you rather that I should come home next Saturday and
stay till Monday, or that I should come to Thanksgiving and stay the
rest of the week? Both I cannot do; but I will try to do the latter,
if you wish it; and I think I shall finish the salt-ship which I am
now engaged upon, about Thanksgiving time--unless foul weather
intervene to retard our progress. How delightfully long the evenings
are now! I do not get intolerably tired any longer; and my thoughts
sometimes wander back to literature and I have momentary impulses to
write stories. But this will not be, at present. The utmost that I can
hope to do, will be to portray some of the characteristics of the life
which I am now living, and of the people with whom I am brought into
contact, for future use. I doubt whether I shall write any more for
the public, till I can have a daily or nightly opportunity of
submitting my productions to the criticism of Sophie Hawthorne. I have
a high opinion of that young lady's critical acumen, but a great dread
of her severity--which, however, the Dove will not fail to temper with
her sweetness.

Dearest, there is nothing at all in this letter; and perhaps it may
come to you at a time when your heart needs the strongest, and
tenderest, and most comfortable words that mine can speak to it. Yet
what could I say, but to assure you that I love you, and partake
whatever of good or evil God sends you--or rather, partake whatever
good God sends you, whether it come in festal garments or mourning
ones; for still it is good, whether arrayed in sable, or
flower-crowned. God bless you, belovedest,

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Novr. 19th, 6 P.M., [1839]

     _Belovedest Wife_,

My heart bids me to send you a greeting; and therefore I do it,
although I do not feel as if I had many thoughts and words at command
tonight, but only feelings and sympathies, which must find their way
to you as well as they can. Dearest, I cannot bear to think of you
sitting all day long in that chamber, and not a soul to commune with
you. But I endeavor, and will still endeavor, to send my soul thither,
from out of the toil and tedium of my daily life;--so think, beloved,
whenever solitude and sad thoughts become intolerable, that, just at
that moment I am near you, and trying to comfort you and make you
sensible of my presence.

Beloved, it occurs to me, that my earnest entreaties to you to be calm
and strong may produce an effect not altogether good. The behests of
Nature may perhaps differ from mine, and be wiser. If she bids you
shed tears, methinks it will be best to let them flow, and then your
grief will melt quietly forth, instead of being pent up till it breaks
out in a torrent. But I cannot speak my counsel to you, dearest, so
decidedly as if I were with you; for then my heart would know all the
state of yours, and what it needed. But love me infinitely, my wife,
and rest your heart with all its heaviness on mine. I know not what
else to say;--but even that is saying something--is it not, dearest?

I rather think, beloved, that I shall come home on Saturday night, and
take my chance of being able to come again on Thanksgiving-day. But
then I shall not be able to remain the rest of the week. That you want
me I know; and, dearest, my head and heart are weary with absence from
you; so that it will be best to snatch the first chance that offers.
Soon, mine own wife, I shall be able to spend much more time with you.

     YOUR LOVINGEST HUSBAND.

Does Sophie Hawthorne keep up my Dove's spirits?

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Novr. 20th, Â½ past 8 P.M., [1839]

Dearest, you know not how your blessed letter strengthens my heart on
your account; for I know by it that God and the angels are supporting
you. And, mine own wife, though I thought that I reverenced you
infinitely before, yet never was so much of that feeling mingled with
my love, as now. You are yourself one of the angels who minister to
your departing brother--the more an angel, because you triumph over
earthly weakness to perform those offices of affection. I feel, now,
with what confidence I can rest upon you in all my sorrows and
troubles--as confident of your strength as of your love. Dearest,
there is nothing in me worthy of you. My heart is weak in comparison
with yours. Its strength, it is true, has never been tried; for I have
never been called to minister at the dying bed of a dear friend; but I
have often thought, that, in such a scene, I should need support from
the dying, instead of being able to give it. I bless God that He has
made Death so beautiful as he appears in the scene which you
describe--that He has caused the light from the other side to shine
over and across the chasm of the grave.

My wife, my spirit has never yearned for communion with you so much as
it does now. I long to hold you on my bosom--to hold you there
silently--for I have no words to write my sympathy, and should have
none to speak them. Sometimes, even after all I have now learned of
your divine fortitude, I feel as if I shall dread to meet you, lest I
should find you quite worn down by this great trial. But, dearest, I
will make up my mind to see you pale, and thinner than you were. Only
do not be sick--do not give me too much to bear.

Novr. 21st, Â½ past 5 P.M. Mine own Dove, your fourth letter came
today, and all the rest were duly received, and performed their
heaven-appointed mission to my soul. The last has left a very cheering
influence on my spirit. Dearest, I love that naughty Sophie Hawthorne
with an unspeakable affection, and bless God for her every minute; for
what my Dove could do without her, passes my comprehension. And, mine
own wife, I have not been born in vain, but to an end worth living
for, since you are able to rest your heart on me, and are thereby
sustained in this sorrow, and enabled to be a help and comfort to your
mother, and a ministering angel to George. Give my love to George. I
regret that we have known each other so little in life; but there will
be time enough hereafter--in that pleasant region "on the other side."

Beloved, I shall come on Saturday, but probably not till the five
o'clock train, unless it should storm; so you must not expect me till
seven or thereabouts. I never did yearn for you so much as now. There
is a feeling in me as if a great while had passed since we met. Is it
so with you?

The days are cold now, the air eager and nipping--yet it suits my
health amazingly. I feel as if I could run a hundred miles at a
stretch, and jump over all the houses that happen to be in my way.
Belovedest, I must bring this letter to a close now, for several
reasons--partly that I may carry it to the Post-Office before it
closes; for I hate to make your father pay the postage of my wife's
letters. Also, I have another short letter of business to write;--and,
moreover, I must go forth into the wide world to seek my supper. This
life of mine is the perfection of a bachelor-life--so perfectly
untrammelled as it is. Do you not fear, my wife, to trust me to live
in such a way any longer?

Belovedest, still keep up your heart for your husband's sake. I pray
to God for quiet sleeps for my Dove, and cheerful awakings--yes,
cheerful; for Death moves with a sweet aspect into your household; and
your brother passes away with him as with a friend. And now farewell,
dearest of wives. You are the hope and joy of your husband's heart.
Never, never forget how very precious you are to him. God bless you,
dearest.

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Novr. 25th, 1839--6 P.M.

     _Belovedest Wife_,

This very day I have held you in my arms; and yet, now that I find
myself again in my solitary room, it seems as if a long while had
already passed--long enough, as I trust my Dove will think, to excuse
my troubling her with an epistle. I came off in the two o'clock cars,
through such a pouring rain, that doubtless Sophie Hawthorne set it
down for certain that I should pass the day and night in Salem. And
perhaps she and the Dove are now watching, with beating heart, to hear
your husband lift the door-latch. Alas, that they must be
disappointed! Dearest, I feel that I ought to be with you now; for it
grieves me to imagine you all alone in that chamber, where you "sit
and _wait_"--as you said to me this morning. This, I trust, is the
last of your sorrow, mine own wife; in which you will not have all the
aid that your husband's bosom, and the profoundest sympathy that
exists within it, can impart.

I found your letter in the Measurer's Desk; and though I knew
perfectly well that it was there, and had thought of it repeatedly,
yet it struck me with a sense of unexpectedness when I saw it. I put
it in my breast-pocket, and did not open it till I found myself
comfortably settled for the evening; for I took my supper of oysters
on my way to my room, and have nothing to do with the busy world till
sunrise tomorrow. Oh, mine own beloved, it seems to me the only thing
worth living for that I have ever done, or been instrumental in, that
God has made me the means of saving you from the heaviest anguish of
your brother's loss. Ever, ever, dearest wife, keep my image, or
rather my reality, between yourself and pain of every kind. Let me
clothe you in my love as in an armour of proof--let me wrap my spirit
round about your own, so that no earthly calamity may come in
immediate contact with it, but be felt, if at all, through a softening
medium. And it is a blessed privilege, and even a happy one, to give
such sympathy as my Dove requires--happy to give--and, dearest, is it
not also happiness to receive it? Our happiness consists in our sense
of the union of our hearts--and has not that union been far more
deeply felt within us now, than if all our ties were those of joy and
gladness? Thus may every sorrow leave us happier than it found us, by
causing our hearts to embrace more closely in the mutual effort to
sustain it.

Dearest, I pray God that your strength may not fail you at the close
of this scene. My heart is not quite at rest about you. It seems to
me, on looking back, that there was a vague inquietude within me all
through this last visit; and this it was, perhaps, that made me seem
more sportive than usual.

Did I tell my carefullest little wife that I had bought me a fur cap,
wherewith my ears may bid defiance to the wintry blast--a poor image,
by the way, to talk of _ears bidding_ defiance. The nose might do it,
because it is capable of emitting sounds like a trumpet--indeed,
Sophie Hawthorne's nose bids defiance without any sound. But what
nonsense this is. Also (I have now been a married man long enough to
feel these details perfectly natural, in writing to my wife) your
husband, having a particular dislike to flannel, is resolved, every
cold morning, to put on two shirts, and has already done so on one
occasion, wonderfully to his comfort. Perhaps--but this I leave to
Sophie Hawthorne's judgment--it might be well to add a daily shirt
to my apparel as the winter advances, and to take them off again, one
by one, with the approach of spring. Dear me, what a puffed-out heap
of cotton-bagging would your husband be, by the middle of January! His
Dove would strive in vain to fold her wings around him.

My beloved, this is Thanksgiving week. Do you remember how we were
employed, or what our state of feeling was, at this time last year? I
have forgotten how far we had advanced into each other's hearts--or
rather, how conscious we had become that we were mutually within one
another--but I am sure we were already dearest friends. But now our
eyes are opened. Now we know that we have found all in each other--all
that life has to give--and a foretaste of eternity. At every former
Thanksgiving-day I have been so ungrateful to Heaven as to feel that
something was wanting, and that my life so far had been abortive; and
therefore, I fear, there has often been repining instead of
thankfulness in my heart. Now I can thank God that he has given me my
Dove, and all the world in her. I wish, dearest, that we could eat our
Thanksgiving dinner together; and were it nothing but your bowl of
bread and milk, we would both of us be therewith content. But I must
sit at our mother's table. One of these days, sweetest wife, we will
invite her to our own.

Will my Dove expect a letter from me so soon? I have written this
evening, because I expect to be engaged tomorrow--moreover, my heart
bade me write. God bless and keep you, dearest.

     YOUR OWNEST DEODATUS.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Novr. 29th, 1839--6 or 7 P.M.

     _Blessedest wife_,

Does our head ache this evening?--and has it ached all or any of the
time to-day? I wish I knew, dearest, for it seems almost too great a
blessing to expect, that my Dove should come quite safe through the
trial which she has encountered. Do, mine own wife, resume all your
usual occupations as soon as possible--your sculpture, your painting,
your music (what a company of sister-arts is combined in the little
person of my Dove!)--and above all, your riding and walking. Write
often to your husband, and let your letters gush from a cheerful
heart; so shall they refresh and gladden me, like draughts from a
sparkling fountain, which leaps from some spot of earth where no grave
has ever been dug. Dearest, for some little time to come, I pray you
not to muse too much upon your brother, even though such musings
should be untinged with gloom, and should appear to make you happier.
In the eternity where he now dwells, it has doubtless become of no
importance to himself whether he died yesterday, or a thousand years
ago; he is already at home in the celestial city--more at home than
ever he was in his mother's house. Then, my beloved, let us leave him
there for the present; and if the shadows and images of this fleeting
time should interpose between us and him, let us not seek to drive
them away, for they are sent of God. By and bye, it will be good and
profitable to commune with your brother's spirit; but so soon after
his release from mortal infirmity, it seems even ungenerous towards
himself, to call him back by yearnings of the heart and too vivid
picturings of what he was.

Little Dove, why did you shed tears the other day, when you supposed
that your husband thought you to blame for regretting the irrevocable
past? Dearest, I never think you to blame; for you positively have no
faults. Not that you always act wisely, or judge wisely, or feel
precisely what it would be wise to feel, in relation to this present
world and state of being; but it is because you are too delicately and
exquisitely wrought in heart, mind, and frame, to dwell in such a
world--because, in short, you are fitter to be in Paradise than here.
You needed, therefore, an interpreter between the world and
yourself--one who should sometimes set you right, not in the abstract
(for there you are never wrong) but relatively to human and earthly
matters;--and such an interpreter is your husband, who can sympathise,
though inadequately, with his wife's heavenly nature, and has likewise
a portion of shrewd earthly sense, enough to guide us both through the
labyrinths of time. Now, dearest, when I criticise any act, word,
thought, or feeling of yours, you must not understand it as a reproof,
or as imputing anything wrong, wherewith you are to burthen your
conscience. Were an angel, however holy and wise, to come and dwell
with mortals, he would need the guidance and instruction of some
mortal; and so will you, my Dove, need mine--and precisely the same
sort of guidance that the angel would. Then do not grieve, nor grieve
your husband's spirit, when he essays to do his office; but remember
that he does it reverently, and in the devout belief that you are, in
immortal reality, both wiser and better than himself, though sometimes
he may chance to interpret the flitting shadows around us more
accurately than you. Hear what I say, dearest, in a cheerful spirit,
and act upon it with cheerful strength. And do not give an undue
weight to my judgment, nor imagine that there is no appeal from it,
and that its decrees are not to be questioned. Rather, make it a rule
always to question them and be satisfied of their correctness;--and so
shall my Dove be improved and perfected in the gift of a human
understanding, till she become even _earthly-wiselier_ than her
sagacious husband. Undine's husband gave her an immortal soul; my
beloved wife must be content with an humbler gift from me, being
already provided with as high and pure a soul as ever was created.

God bless you, belovedest. I bestow three kisses on the air--they are
intended for your eyelids and brow, to drive away the head-ache.

     YOUR OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Custom-House_, Novr. 30th [1839]

     _Mine own Dove_,

You will have received my letter, dearest, ere now, and I trust that
it will have conveyed the peace of my own heart into yours; for my
heart is too calm and peaceful in the sense of our mutual love, to be
disturbed even by my sweetest wife's disquietude. Belovedest and
blessedest, I cannot feel anything but comfort in you. Rest quietly on
my deep, deep, deepest affection. You deserve it all, and infinitely
more than all, were it only for the happiness you give me. I
apprehended that this cup could not pass from you, without your
tasting bitterness among its dregs. You have been too calm, my
beloved--you have exhausted your strength. Let your soul lean upon my
love, till we meet again--then all your troubles shall be hushed.

     Your ownest, happiest,

     DEODATUS.

How does Sophie Hawthorne do? Expect a letter on Tuesday. God bless my
dearest.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, December 1st, 1839--6 or 7 P.M.

     _My Dearest_,

The day must not pass without my speaking a word or two to my
belovedest wife, of whom I have thought, with tender anxieties mingled
with comfortable hopes, all day long. Dearest, is your heart at peace
now? God grant it--and I have faith that He will communicate the peace
of my heart to yours. Mine own wife, always when there is trouble
within you, let your husband know of it. Strive to fling your burthen
upon me; for there is strength enough in me to bear it all, and love
enough to make me happy in bearing it. I will not give up any of my
conjugal rights--and least of all this most precious right of
ministering to you in all sorrow. My bosom was made, among other
purposes, for mine ownest wife to shed tears upon. This I have known,
ever since we were married--and I had yearnings to be your support and
comforter, even before I knew that God was uniting our spirits in
immortal wedlock. I used to think that it would be happiness enough,
food enough for my heart, it I could be the life-long, familiar friend
of your family, and be allowed to see yourself every evening, and to
watch around you to keep harm away--though you might never know what
an interest I felt in you. And how infinitely more than this has been
granted me! Oh, never dream, blessedest wife, that you can be other
than a comfort to your husband--or that he can be disappointed in you.
Mine own Dove, I hardly know how it is, but nothing that you do or say
ever surprises or disappoints me; it must be that my spirit is so
thoroughly and intimately conscious of you, that there exists latent
within me a prophetic knowledge of all your vicissitudes of joy or
sorrow; so that, though I cannot foretell them before-hand, yet I
recognize them when they come. Nothing disturbs the preconceived idea
of you in my mind. Whether in bliss or agony, still you are mine own
Dove--still my blessing--still my peace. Belovedest, since the
foregoing sentence, I have been interrupted; so I will leave the rest
of the sheet till tomorrow evening. Good night, and in writing these
words my soul has flown through the air to give you a fondest kiss.
Did you not feel it?

Decr. 2d.--Your letter came to me at the Custom-House, very dearest,
at about eleven o'clock; and I opened it with an assured hope of
finding good news about my Dove; for I had trusted very much in Sophie
Hawthorne's assistance. Well, I am afraid I shall never find in my
heart to call that excellent little person "Naughty" again--no; and I
have even serious thoughts of giving up all further designs upon her
nose, since she hates so much to have it kissed. Yet the poor little
nose!--would it not be quite depressed (I do not mean flattened) by my
neglect, after becoming accustomed to such marked attention? And
besides, I have a particular affection for that nose, insomuch that I
intend, one of these days, to offer it an oblation of rich and
delicate odours. But I suppose Sophie Hawthorne would apply her
handkerchief, so that the poor nose should reap no pleasure nor profit
from my incense. Naughty Sophie Hawthorne! There--I have called her
"naughty" already--and on a mere supposition, too.

Half a page of nonsense about Sophie Hawthorne's nose! And now have I
anything to say to my little Dove? Yes--a reproof. My Dove is to
understand, that she entirely exceeds her jurisdiction, in presuming
to sit in judgment upon herself, and pass such severe censure as she
did upon her Friday's letter--or indeed any censure at all. It was
her bounden duty to write that letter; for it was the cry of her
heart, which ought and must have reached her husband's ears, wherever
in the world he might be. And yet you call it wicked. Was it Sophie
Hawthorne or the Dove that called it so? Naughty Sophie
Hawthorne--naughty Dove--for I believe they are both partakers of this
naughtiness.

Dearest, I have never had the good luck to profit much, or indeed any,
by attending lectures; so that I think the ticket had better be
bestowed on somebody who can listen to Mr. Emerson more worthily. My
evenings are very precious to me; and some of them are unavoidably
thrown away in paying or receiving visits, or in writing letters of
business; and therefore I prize the rest as if the sands of the
hour-glass were gold or diamond dust. I have no other time to sit in
my parlor (let me call it ours) and be happy by our own
fireside--happy in reveries about a certain little wife of mine, who
would fain have me spend my evenings in hearing lectures, lest I
should incommode her with too frequent epistles.

Good bye, dearest. I suppose I have left a dozen questions in your
letter unanswered; but you shall ask them again when we meet. Do not
you long to see me? Mercy on us,--what a pen! It looks as if I had
laid a strong emphasis on that sentence. God bless my Dove, and Sophie
Hawthorne too.--So prays their ownest husband.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Decr. 5th, 1839--5 P.M.

     _Dearest wife_,

I do wish that you would evince the power of your spirit over its
outward manifestations, in some other way than by raising an
inflammation over your eye. Do, belovedest, work another miracle
forthwith, and cause this mountain--for I fancy it as of really
mountainous bulk--cause it to be cast into the sea, or anywhere else;
so that both eyes may greet your husband, when he comes home.
Otherwise, I know not but my eyes will have an inflammation too;--they
certainly smarted in a very unwonted manner, last evening. "The
naughty swelling!" as my Dove (or Sophie Hawthorne) said of the
swollen cheek that afflicted me last summer. Will kisses have any
efficacy? No; I am afraid not, for if they were medicinal, my Dove's
eyelids have been so imbued with them that no ill would have come
there. Nevertheless, though not a preventive, a kiss may chance to
be a remedy. Can Sophie Hawthorne be prevailed upon to let me try it?

I went to see my wife's (and of course my own) sister Mary, on Tuesday
evening. She appeared very well; and we had a great deal of good talk,
wherein my Dove was not utterly forgotten--(now will Sophie Hawthorne,
thinking the Dove slighted, pout her lip at that expression)--well
then, my Dove was directly or indirectly concerned in all my thoughts,
and most of my words. Mrs. Park was not there, being gone, I believe,
to some lecture. Mary and your husband talked with the utmost
hopefulness and faith of my Dove's future health and well-being.
Dearest, you _are_ well (all but the naughty swelling) and you always
will be well. I love Mary because she loves you so much;--our
affections meet in you, and so we become kindred. But everybody loves
my Dove--everybody that knows her--and those that know her not love
her also, though unconsciously, whenever they image to themselves
something sweeter, and tenderer, and nobler, than they can meet with
on earth. It is the likeness of my Dove that has haunted the dreams of
poets, ever since the world began. Happy me, to whom that dream has
become the reality of all realities--whose bosom has been warmed, and
is forever warmed, with the close embrace of her who has flitted
shadowlike away from all other mortals! Dearest, I wish your husband
had the gift of making rhymes; for methinks there is poetry in his
head and heart, since he has been in love with you. You are a Poem, my
Dove. Of what sort, then? Epic?--Mercy on me,--no! A sonnet?--no; for
that is too labored and artificial. My Dove is a sort of sweet,
simple, gay, pathetic ballad, which Nature is singing, sometimes with
tears, sometimes with smiles, and sometimes with intermingled smiles
and tears.

I was invited to dine at Mr. Bancroft's yesterday with Miss Margaret
Fuller; but Providence had given me some business to do; for which I
was very thankful. When my Dove and Sophie Hawthorne can go with me, I
shall not be afraid to accept invitations to meet literary lions and
lionesses, because then I shall put the above-said redoubtable little
personage in the front of the battle. What do you think, Dearest, of
the expediency of my making a caucus speech? A great many people are
very desirous of listening to your husband's eloquence; and that is
considered the best method of making my debut. Now, probably, will
Sophie Hawthorne utterly refuse to be kissed, unless I give up all
notion of speechifying at a caucus. Silly little Sophie!--I would
not do it, even if thou thyself besought it of me.

Belovedest, I wish, before declining your ticket to Mr. Emerson's
lectures, that I had asked whether you wished me to attend them; for
if you do, I should have more pleasure in going, than if the wish were
originally my own.

Dearest wife, nobody can come within the circle of my loneliness, save
you;--you are my only companion in the world;--at least, when I
compare other intercourse with our intimate communion, it seems as
[if] other people were the world's width asunder. And yet I love all
the world better for my Dove's sake.

Good bye, belovedest. Drive away that "naughty swelling."

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

Do not expect me till seven o'clock on Saturday--as I shall not leave
Boston till sunset.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Decr. 11th, 1839--7 P.M.

     _Belovedest_,

I am afraid you will expect a letter tomorrow--afraid, because I feel
very sure that I shall not be able to fill this sheet tonight. I am
well, and happy, and I love you dearly, sweetest wife;--nevertheless,
it is next to impossibility for me to put ideas into words. Even in
writing these two or three lines, I have fallen into several long fits
of musing. I wish there was something in the intellectual world
analogous to the Daguerrotype (is that the name of it?) in the
visible--something which should print off our deepest, and subtlest,
and delicatest thoughts and feelings as minutely and accurately as the
above-mentioned instrument paints the various aspects of Nature. Then
might my Dove and I interchange our reveries--but my Dove would get
only lead in exchange for gold. Dearest, your last letter brought the
warmth of your very heart to your husband--Belovedest, I cannot
possibly write one word more, to-night.

This striving to talk on paper does but remove you farther from me. It
seems as if Sophie Hawthorne fled away into infinite space the moment
I try to fix her image before me in order to inspire my pen;--whereas,
no sooner do I give myself up to reverie, than here she is again,
smiling lightsomely by my side. There will be no writing of letters in
Heaven; at least, I shall write none then, though I think it would add
considerably to my bliss to receive them from my Dove. Never was I so
stupid as to-night;--and yet it is not exactly stupidity, either, for
my fancy is bright enough, only it has, just at this time, no command
of external symbols. Good night, dearest wife. Love your husband, and
dream of him.

Decr. 12th--6 P.M. Blessedest--Dove-ward and Sophie Hawthorne-ward
doth your husband acknowledge himself "very reprehensible," for
leaving his poor wife destitute of news from him such an interminable
time--one, two, three, four days tomorrow noon. After seven years'
absence, without communication, a marriage, if I mistake not, is
deemed to be legally dissolved. Does it not appear at least seven
years to my Dove, since we parted? It does to me. And will my Dove, or
naughty Sophie Hawthorne, choose to take advantage of the law, and
declare our marriage null and void? Oh, naughty, naughty, naughtiest
Sophie Hawthorne, to suffer such an idea to come into your head! The
Dove, I am sure, would not disown her husband, but would keep her
heart warm with faith and love for a million of years; so that when he
returned to her (as he surely would, at some period of Eternity, to
spend the rest of eternal existence with her) he would seem to find in
her bosom the warmth which his parting embrace had left there.

Very dearest, I do wish you would come to see me, this evening. If we
could be together in this very parlour of ours, I think you, and both
of us, would feel more completely at home than we ever have before in
all our lives. Your chamber is but a room in your mother's house,
where my Dove cannot claim an independent and separate right; she has
a right, to be sure, but it is as a daughter. As a wife, it might be a
question whether she has a right. Now this pleasant little room, where
I sit, together with the bed-room in which I intend to dream tonight
of my Dove, is my dwelling, my castle, mine own place wherein to be,
which I have bought, for the time being, with the profits of mine own
labor. Then is it not our home?

     (Rest of letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Decr. 18th, 1839--nearly 7 P.M.

     _Belovedest_,

I wish you could see our parlour to-night--how bright and cheerful it
looks, with the blaze of the coal-fire throwing a ruddy tinge over the
walls, in spite of the yellow gleam of two lamps. Now if my Dove were
sitting in the easiest of our two easy chairs--(for sometimes I should
choose to have her sit in a separate chair, in order to realise our
individuality, as well as our unity)--then would the included space of
these four walls, together with the little contiguous bed-room, seem
indeed like home.--But the soul of home is wanting now. Oh,
naughtiest, why are you not here to welcome your husband when he comes
in at eventide, chilled with his wintry day's toil? Why does he not
find the table placed cosily in front of the fire, and a cup of tea
steaming fragrantly--or else a bowl of warm bread and milk, such as
his Dove feeds upon? A much-to-be-pitied husband am I, naughty
wife--a homeless man--a wanderer in the desert of this great city;
picking up a precarious subsistence wherever I happen to find a
restaurateur or an oyster-shop--and returning at night to a lonely
fireside. Dearest, have I brought the tears into your eyes? What an
unwise little person is my Dove, to let the tears gather in her eyes
for such nonsensical pathos as this! Yet not nonsensical either,
inasmuch as it is a sore trial to your husband to be estranged from
that which makes life a reality to him, and to be compelled to spend
so many God-given days in a dream--in an outward show, which has
nothing to satisfy the soul that has become acquainted with truth.
But, mine own wife, if you had not taught me what happiness is, I
should not have known that there is anything lacking to me now. I am
dissatisfied--not because, at any former period of my life, I was ever
a thousandth part so happy as now--but because Hope feeds and grows
strong on the happiness within me. Good night, belovedest wife. I have
a note to write to Mr. Capen, who torments me every now-and-then about
a book which he wants me to manufacture. Hereafter, I intend that my
Dove shall manage all my correspondence:--indeed, it is my purpose to
throw all sorts of trouble upon my Dove's shoulders. Good night now,
dearest.--

December 20th--7 P.M. Blessedest wife--has not Sophie Hawthorne been
very impatient for this letter, one half of which yet remains
undeveloped in my brain and heart? Would that she could enter those
inward regions, and read the letter there--together with so much that
never can be expressed in written or spoken words. And can she not do
this? The Dove can do it, even if Sophie Hawthorne fail. Dearest,
would it be unreasonable for me to ask you to manage my share of the
correspondence, as well as your own?--to throw yourself into my heart,
and make it gush out with more warmth and freedom than my own pen can
avail to do? How I should delight to see an epistle from myself to
Sophie Hawthorne, written by my Dove!--or to my Dove, Sophie Hawthorne
being the amanuensis! I doubt not, that truths would then be spoken,
which my heart would recognise as existing within its depths, yet
which can never be clothed in words of my own. You know that we are
one another's consciousness--then it is not poss--My dearest, George
Hillard has come in upon me, in the midst of the foregoing sentence,
and I have utterly forgotten what I meant to say. But it is not much
matter. Even if I could convince you of the expediency of your
writing my letters as well as your own, still, when you attempted to
take the pen out of my hand, I believe I should resist very
strenuously. For, belovedest, though not an epistolarian by nature,
yet the instinct of communicating myself to you makes it a necessity
and a joy to write.

Your husband has received an invitation, through Mr. Collector
Bancroft, to go to Dr. Channing's to-night. What is to be done?
Anything, rather than to go. I never will venture into company, unless
I can put myself under the protection of Sophie Hawthorne. She, I am
sure, will take care that no harm comes to me. Or my Dove might take
me "under her wing."

Dearest, you must not expect me too fervently on Christmas eve,
because it is very uncertain whether Providence will bring us together
then. If not, I shall take care to advise you thereof by
letter--which, however, may chance not to come to hand till three
o'clock on Christmas day. And there will be my Dove, making herself
nervous with waiting for me. Dearest, I wish I could be the source of
nothing but happiness to you--and that disquietude, hope deferred, and
disappointment, might not ever have aught to do with your affection.
Does the joy compensate for the pain? Naughty Sophie Hawthorne--silly
Dove--will you let that foolish question bring tears into your eyes?

My Dove's letter was duly received.

     Your lovingest

     HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, December 24th, 1839. 6 or 7 P.M.

     _My very dearest_,

While I sit down disconsolately to write this letter, at this very
moment is my Dove expecting to hear her husband's footstep upon the
threshold. She fully believes, that, within the limits of the hour
which is now passing, she will be clasped to my bosom. Belovedest, I
cannot bear to have you yearn for me so intensely. By and bye, when
you find that I do not come, our head will begin to ache;--but still,
being the "hopingest little person" in the world, you will not give me
up, perhaps till eight o'clock. But soon it will be bed-time--it will
be deep night--and not a spoken word, not a written line, will have
come to your heart from your naughtiest of all husbands. Sophie
Hawthorne, at least, will deem him the naughtiest of husbands; but my
Dove will keep her faith in him just as firmly and fervently, as if
she were acquainted with the particular impossibilities which keep
him from her. Dearest wife, I did hope, till this afternoon, that I
should be able to disburthen myself of the cargo of salt which has
been resting on my weary shoulders for a week past; but it does seem
as if Heaven's mercy were not meant for us miserable Custom-House
officers. The holiest of holydays--the day that brought ransom to all
other sinners--leaves us in slavery still.

Nevertheless, dearest, if I did not feel two disappointments in
one--your own and mine--I should feel much more comfortable and
resigned than I do. If I could have come to you to-night, I must
inevitably have returned hither tomorrow evening. But now, in requital
of my present heaviness of spirit, I am resolved that my next visit
shall be at least one day longer than I could otherwise have ventured
to make it. We cannot spend this Christmas eve together, mine own
wife; but I have faith that you will see me on the eve of the New
Year. Will not you be glad when I come home to spend three whole days,
that I was kept away from you for a few brief hours on Christmas eve?
For if I went now, I could not be with you then.

My blessedest, write and let me know that you have not been very much
disturbed by my non-appearance. I pray you to have the feelings of a
wife towards me, dearest--that is, you must feel that my whole life is
yours, a life-time of long days, and therefore it is no irreparable
nor very grievous loss, though sometimes a few of those days are
wasted away from you. A wife should be calm and quiet, in the settled
certainty of possessing her husband. Above all, dearest, bear these
crosses with philosophy for my sake; for it makes me anxious and
depressed, to imagine your anxiety and depression. Oh, that you could
be very joyful when I come, and yet not sad when I fail to come! Is
that impossible, my sweetest Dove?--is it impossible, my naughtiest
Sophie Hawthorne?




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Jany. 1st, 1840. 6 o'clock P.M.

     _Belovedest wife_,

Your husband's heart was exceedingly touched by that little backhanded
note, and likewise by the bundle of allumettes--half a dozen of which
I have just been kissing with great affection. Would that I might kiss
that poor dear finger of mine! Kiss it for my sake, sweetest Dove--and
tell naughty Sophie Hawthorne to kiss it too. Nurse it well, dearest;
for no small part of my comfort and cheeriness of heart depends upon
that beloved finger. If it be not well enough to bear its part in
writing me a letter within a few days, do not be surprised if I send
down the best surgeon in Boston to effect a speedy cure. Nevertheless,
darlingest wife, restrain the good little finger, if it show any
inclination to recommence its labors too soon. If your finger be
pained in writing, your husband's heart ought to (and I hope would)
feel every twinge.

Belovedest, I have not yet wished you a Happy New Year! And yet I
have--many, many of them; as many, mine own wife, as we can enjoy
together--and when we can no more enjoy them together, we shall no
longer think of Happy New Years on earth, but look longingly for the
New Year's Day of eternity. What a year the last has been! Dearest,
you make the same exclamation; but my heart originates it too. It has
been the year of years--the year in which the flower of our life has
bloomed out--the flower of our life and of our love, which we are to
wear in our bosoms forever. Oh, how I love you, belovedest wife!--and
how I thank God that He has made me capable to know and love you!
Sometimes I feel, deep, deep down in my heart, how dearest above all
things you are to me; and those are blissful moments. It is such a
happiness to be conscious, at last, of something real. All my life
hitherto, I have been walking in a dream, among shadows which could
not be pressed to my bosom; but now, even in this dream of time, there
is something that takes me out of it, and causes me to be a dreamer no
more. Do you not feel, dearest, that we live above time and apart from
time, even while we seem to be in the midst of time? Our affection
diffuses eternity round about us.

My carefullest little wife will rejoice to know that I have been free
to sit by a good fire all this bitter cold day--not but what I have a
salt-ship on my hands, but she must have some ballast, before she can
discharge any more salt; and ballast cannot be procured till the day
after tomorrow. Are not these details very interesting? I have a mind,
some day, to send my dearest a journal of all my doings and
sufferings, my whole external life, from the time I awake at dawn,
till I close my eyes at night. What a dry, dull history would it be!
But then, apart from this, I would write another journal of my inward
life throughout the self-same day--my fits of pleasant thought, and
those likewise which are shadowed by passing clouds--the yearnings of
my heart towards my Dove--my pictures of what we are to enjoy
together. Nobody would think that the same man could live two such
different lives simultaneously. But then, as I have said above, the
grosser life is a dream, and the spiritual life a reality.

Very dearest, I wish you would make out a list of books that you would
like to be in our library; for I intend, whenever the cash and the
opportunity occur together, to buy enough to fill up our new
book-case; and I want to feel that I am buying them for both of us.
When I next come to Salem, you shall read the list, and we will
discuss it, volume by volume. I suppose the book-case will hold
about two hundred volumes; but you need not calculate upon making such
a vast collection all at once. It shall be accomplished in small lots;
and then we shall prize every volume, and receive a separate pleasure
from the acquisition of it.

Does it seem a great while since I left you, dearest? Truly, it does
to me. These separations lengthen our earthly lives by at least
nine-tenths; but then, in our brief seasons of communion, there is the
essence of a thousand years. Was it Thursday that I told my Dove would
be the day of my next appearance?--or Friday? "Oh, Friday, certainly!"
says Sophie Hawthorne. Well; it must be as naughty Sophie says.

Oh, belovedest, I want you. You have given me a new feeling,
blessedest wife--a sense, that strong as I may have deemed myself, I
am insufficient for my own support; and that there is a tender little
Dove, without whose help I cannot get through this weary world at all.
God bless you, ownest wife.

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Jany. 3d, 1840--3 P.M.

What a best of all possible husbands you have, sweetest wife, to be
writing to you so soon again, although he has heard nothing from you
since the latter part of the year 1839! What a weary length of time
that naughty finger has been ill! Unless there are signs of speedy
amendment, we must begin to think of "rotation in office," and the
left hand must be nominated to the executive duties of which the right
is no longer capable. Yet, dearest, do not imagine that I am
impatient. I do indeed long to see your delicatest little penmanship;
(what an enormity it would be to call my Dove's most feminine of
handwritings pen_man_ship!) but it would take away all the happiness
of it, when I reflected that each individual letter had been a pain to
you. Nay; I would not have you write, if you find that the impediments
of this mode of utterance check the flow of your mind and heart.

But you tell me that the wounded finger will be no hindrance to your
painting. Very glad am I, dearest; for you cannot think how much
delight those pictures are going to give me. I shall sit and gaze at
them whole hours together--and these will be my happiest hours, the
fullest of you, though all are full of you. I never owned a picture in
my life; yet pictures have always been among the earthly possessions
(and they are spiritual possessions too) which I most coveted. I know
not what value my Dove's pictures might bear at an auction-room; but
to me, certainly, they will be incomparably more precious than all the
productions of all the painters since Apelles. When we live together
in our own home, belovedest, we will paint pictures together--that is,
our minds and hearts shall unite to form the conception, to which your
hand shall give material existence. I have often felt as if I could be
a painter, only I am sure that I could never handle a brush;--now my
Dove will show me the images of my inward eye, beautified and
etherealised by the mixture of her own spirit. Belovedest, I think I
shall get these two pictures put into mahogany frames, because they
will harmonize better with the furniture of our parlor than gilt
frames would.

While I was writing the foregoing paragraph, Mary has sent to inquire
whether I mean to go to Salem tomorrow, intending, if I did, to send a
letter by me. But, alas! I am not going. The inquiry, however, has
made me feel a great yearning to be there. But it is not possible,
because I have an engagement at Cambridge on Saturday evening; and
even if it were otherwise, it would be better to wait till the middle
of the week, or a little later, when I hope to spend three or four
days with you. Oh, what happiness, when we shall be able to look
forward to an illimitable time in each other's society--when a day or
two of absence will be far more infrequent than the days which we
spend together now. Then a quiet will settle down upon us, a
passionate quiet, which is the consummation of happiness.

Dearest, I hope you have not found it impracticable to walk, though
the atmosphere be so wintry. Did we walk together in any such cold
weather, last winter? I believe we did. How strange, that such a
flower as our affection should have blossomed amid snow and wintry
winds--accompaniments which no poet or novelist, that I know of, has
ever introduced into a love-tale. Nothing like our story was ever
written--or ever will be--for we shall not feel inclined to make the
public our confidant; but if it could be told, methinks it would be
such as the angels might take delight to hear. If I mistake not, my
Dove has expressed some such idea as this, in one of her recent
letters.

Well-a-day! I have strolled thus far through my letter, without once
making mention of naughty Sophie Hawthorne. Will she pardon the
neglect? Present my profound respects to her beloved nose, and say
that I still entreat her to allow my Dove to kiss her cheek. When she
complies with this oft-repeated petition, I shall hope that her spirit
is beginning to be tamed, and shall then meditate some other and more
difficult trials of it. Nonsense! Do not believe me, dear little
Sophie Hawthorne. I would not tame you for the whole Universe.

But now good bye, dearest wife. Keep yourself in good heart while I am
absent, and grow round and plump and rosy;--eat a whole chicken every
day;--go to bed at nine o'clock or earlier, and sleep sound till
sunrise. Come to me in dreams, beloved. What should I do in this weary
world, without the idea of you, dearest! Give my love to your father
and mother, and to Elizabeth.

     God bless you, darling.

     YOUR OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Jany. 24th, 1840--4 P.M.

     _Ownest Dove_,

Your letter came this forenoon, announcing the advent of the pictures;
so I came home as soon as I possibly could--and there was the package!
I naturally trembled as I undid it, so eager was I to behold them.
Dearissima, there never was anything so lovely and precious in this
world. They are perfect. So soon as the dust and smoke of my fire had
evaporated, I put them on the mantelpiece, and sat a long time before
them with clasped hands, gazing, and gazing, and gazing, and painting
a fac-simile of them in my heart, in whose most sacred chamber they
shall keep a place forever and ever. Belovedest, I was not long in
finding out the Dove in the Menaggio. In fact, she was the very first
object that my eyes rested on, when I uncovered the picture. She flew
straightway into my heart--and yet she remains just where you placed
her. Dearest, if it had not been for your strict injunctions that
nobody nor anything should touch the pictures, I do believe that my
lips would have touched that naughty Sophie Hawthorne, as she stands
on the bridge. Do you think the perverse little damsel would have
vanished beneath my kiss? What a misfortune would that have been to
her poor lover!--to find that he kissed away his mistress. But, at
worst, she would have remained on my lips. However, I shall refrain
from all endearments, till you tell me that a kiss may be hazarded
without fear of her taking it in ill part and absenting herself
without leave.

Mine ownest, it is a very noble-looking cavalier with whom Sophie is
standing on the bridge. Are you quite sure that her own husband is the
companion of her walk? Yet I need not ask--for there is the Dove to
bear witness to his identity. That true and tender bird would never
have alighted on another hand--never have rested so near another
bosom. Yes; it must be my very self; and from henceforth it shall be
held for an absolute and indisputable truth. It is not my picture, but
the very I; and as my inner self belongs to you, there is no doubt
that you have caused my soul to pervade the figure. There we are,
unchangeable. Years cannot alter us, nor our relation to each other.

Ownest, we will talk about these pictures all our lives and longer; so
there is no need that I should say all that I think and feel about
them now; especially as I have yet only begun to understand and feel
them. I have put them into my bed-room for the present, being afraid
to trust them on the mantel-piece; but I cannot help going to feast my
eyes upon them, every little while. I have determined not to hang them
up till after I have been to Salem, for fear of the dust and of the
fingers of the chamber-maid and other visitants. Whenever I am away,
they will be safely locked up, either in the bureau or in my closet. I
shall want your express directions as to the height at which they
ought to be hung, and the width of the space between them, and other
minutest particulars. We will discuss these matters, when I come home
to my wife.

Belovedest, there are several obstacles to my coming home immediately.
At present, two of the Measurers are employed, and another is detained
at his home in Chelsea by the sickness of his family, and Colonel Hall
continues too unwell to be at the Custom-House; so that I am the only
one in attendance there; and moreover I have a coal vessel to
discharge to-morrow. But this state of affairs will not continue long.
I think I cannot fail to be at liberty by Tuesday or Wednesday at
furthest; and at all events, next week shall not pass without our
meeting; even if I should have barely time to press you in my arms,
and say goodbye. But the probability is, that I shall come to spend a
week.

Dearissima, be patient--Sophie Hawthorne as well as the Dove.

My carefullest little wife, I am of opinion that Elizabeth has been
misinformed as to the increased prevalence of the small-pox. It could
not be so generally diffused among the merchants and business-people
without my being aware of it; nor do I hear of its committing such
fearful ravages anywhere. The folks at the Custom-House know of no
such matter; nor does George Hillard. In truth, I had supposed (till I
heard otherwise from you) that all cause for alarm was past. Trust me,
dearest, there is no need of heart-quake on my account. You have been
in greater danger than your husband.

God be with you, blessedest and blessingest. I did ...

     (Remainder of letter missing)

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, February 7th, 1840--Â½ past 3 P.M.

     _Ownest Dove_,

Can you reckon the ages that have elapsed since our last embrace? It
quite surpasses my powers of computation. I only know that, in some
long by-gone time, I had a wife--and that now I am a widowed man,
living not in the present, but in the past and future. My life would
be empty indeed, if I could neither remember nor anticipate; but I can
do both; and so my heart continues to keep itself full of light and
warmth. Belovedest, let it be so likewise with you. You promised
me--did you not?--to be happy during our separation, and really I must
insist upon holding you to your word even if it should involve a
miracle.

Dearest, I have hung up the pictures--the Isola over the mantel-piece,
and the Menaggio on the opposite wall. This arrangement pleased me
better, on the whole, than the other which we contemplated; and I
cannot perceive but that the light is equally favorable for them both.
You cannot imagine how they glorify our parlor--and what a solace they
are to its widowed inhabitant. I sit before them with something of the
quiet and repose which your own beloved presence is wont to impart to
me. I gaze at them by all sorts of light--daylight, twilight, and
candle-light; and when the lamps are extinguished, and before getting
into bed, I sit looking at these pictures, by the flickering
fire-light. They are truly an infinite enjoyment. I take great care of
them, and have hitherto hung the curtains before them every morning;
and they remain covered till after I have kindled my fire in the
afternoon. But I suppose this precaution need not be taken much
longer. I think that this slight veil produces a not unpleasing
effect, especially upon the Isola--a gentle and tender gloom, like the
first approaches of twilight. Nevertheless, whenever I remove the
curtains I am always struck with new surprise at the beauty which then
gleams forth. Mine ownest, you are a wonderful little Dove.

What beautiful weather this is--beautiful, at least, so far as sun,
sky, and atmosphere are concerned; though a poor wingless biped, like
my Dove's husband, is sometimes constrained to wish that he could
raise himself a little above the earth. How much mud and mire, how
many pools of unclean water, how many slippery footsteps and perchance
heavy tumbles, might be avoided, if we could but tread six inches
above the crust of this world. Physically, we cannot do this; our
bodies cannot; but it seems to me that our hearts and minds may keep
themselves above moral mud-puddles, and other discomforts of the
soul's path-way, and so enjoy the sunshine.

I have added Coleridge's Poems, a very good edition in three volumes,
to our library. Dearest, dearest, what a joy it is to think of you,
whenever I buy a book--to think that we shall read them aloud to one
another, and that they are to be our mutual and familiar friends for
life. I intended to have asked you again for that list which you
shewed me; but it will do the next time I come. I mean to go to a
book-auction this evening. When our book-case is filled, my
bibliomania will probably cease; for its shelves, I think, would hold
about all the books that I should care to read--all, at least, that I
should wish to possess as household friends.

What a reprehensible husband am I, not to have inquired, in the very
first sentence of my letter, whether my belovedest has quite
recovered from the varioloid! But, in truth, it seemed so long since
we parted, that none but chronic diseases can have subsisted from that
time to this. I make no doubt, therefore, but that the afflicted arm
is entirely recovered, and that only a slight scar remains--which
shall be kissed, some time or other. And how are your eyes, my
blessedest? Do not torture them by attempting to write, before they
are quite well. If you inflict pain on them for such a purpose, your
husband's eyes will be sensible of it, when he shall read your
letters. Remember that we have now a common property in each other's
eyes.

Dearest, I have not seen Colonel Hall since my return hither--he being
gone to Maine. When he comes back, or shortly thereafter, I will try
to prevail on your neglectful spouse to pay you a short visit.
Methinks he is a very cold and loveless sort of person. I have been
pestering him, ever since I began this letter, to send you some word
of affectionate remembrance; but he utterly refuses to send anything,
save a kiss apiece to the Dove's eyes and mouth, and to Sophie
Hawthorne's nose and foot. Will you have the kindness to see that
these valuable consignments arrive at their destination? Dearest
wife, the letter-writer belies your ownest husband. He thinks of you,
and yearns for you all day long.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, Feby. 11th, 1840--7 P.M.

     _Belovedest_,

Your letter, with its assurance of your present convalescence, and its
promise (to which I shall hold you fast) that you will never be sick
any more, caused me much joy.... Dearest, George Hillard came in just
as I had written the first sentence; so we will begin on a new score.

Your husband has been measuring coal all day, aboard of a black little
British schooner, in a dismal dock at the north end of the city. Most
of the time, he paced the deck to keep himself warm; for the wind
(north-east, I believe it was) blew up through the dock, as if it had
been the pipe of a pair of bellows. The vessel lying deep between two
wharves, there was no more delightful prospect, on the right hand and
on the left, than the posts and timbers, half immersed in the water,
and covered with ice, which the rising and falling of successive tides
had left upon them; so that they looked like immense icicles. Across
the water, however, not more than half a mile off, appeared the Bunker
Hill monument; and what interested me considerably more, a
church-steeple, with the dial of a clock upon it, whereby I was
enabled to measure the march of the weary hours. Sometimes your
husband descended into the dirty little cabin of the schooner, and
warmed himself by a red-hot stove, among biscuit-barrels, pots and
kettles, sea-chests, and innumerable lumber of all sorts--his
olfactories, meanwhile, being greatly refreshed by the odour of a
pipe, which the captain or some of his crew were smoking. But at last
came the sunset, with delicate clouds, and a purple light upon the
islands; and your husband blessed it, because it was the signal of his
release; and so he came home to talk with his dearest wife. And now he
bids her farewell, because he is tired and sleepy. God bless you,
belovedest. Dream happy dreams of me tonight.

February 12th--Evening.--All day long again, best wife, has your poor
husband been engaged in a very black business--as black as a coal; and
though his face and hands have undergone a thorough purification, he
feels as if he were not altogether fit to hold communion with his
white Dove. Methinks my profession is somewhat akin to that of a
chimney-sweeper; but the latter has the advantage over me, because,
after climbing up through the darksome flue of the chimney, he emerges
into the midst of the golden air, and sings out his melodies far over
the heads of the whole tribe of weary earth-plodders. My dearest, my
toil today has been cold and dull enough; nevertheless your husband
was neither cold nor dull; for he kept his heart warm and his spirit
bright with thoughts of his belovedest wife. I had strong and happy
yearnings for you to-day, ownest Dove--happy, even though it was such
an eager longing, which I knew could not then be fulfilled, to clasp
you to my bosom. And now here I am in our parlour, aweary--too tired,
almost, to write.

Well, dearest, my labors are over for the present. I cannot, however,
come home just at present, three of the Measurers being now absent;
but you shall see me very soon. Naughtiest, why do you say that you
have scarcely seen your husband, this winter? Have there not, to say
nothing of shorter visits, been two eternities of more than a week
each, which were full of blessings for us? My Dove has quite forgotten
these. Oh, well! If visits of a week long be not worth remembering, I
shall alter my purpose of coming to Salem for another like
space;--otherwise I might possibly have been there, by Saturday night,
at furthest. Dear me, how sleepy I am! I can hardly write, as you will
discover by the blottings and scratchings. So good-bye now,
darlingest;--and I will finish in the freshness of the morning.

February 13th--Past 8 A.M. Belovedest, how very soon this letter will
be in your hands. It brings us much closer together, when the written
words of one of us can come to the heart of the other, in the very
same day that they flowed from the heart of the writer. I mean to come
home to our parlour early to-day; so, when you receive this letter,
you can imagine me there, sitting in front of the Isola. I have this
moment interrupted myself to go and look at that precious production.
How I wish that naughty Sophie Hawthorne could be induced to turn her
face towards me! Nevertheless, the figure is her veritable self, and
so would the face be, only that she deems it too beauteous to be
thrown away on her husband's gaze. I have not dared to kiss her yet.
Will she abide it?

My dearest, do not expect me very fervently till I come. I am glad you
were so careful of your inestimable eyes as not to write to me
yesterday. Mrs. Hillard says that Elizabeth made her a call.
Good-bye. I am very well to day, and unspeakably happy in the thought
that I have a dearest little wife, who loves me pretty well. God bless
her.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, March 11th, 1840--2 P.M.

     _Blessedest_,

It seems as if I were looking back to a former state of existence,
when I think of the precious hours which we have lived together. And
now we are in two different worlds--widowed, both of us--both of us
deceased, and each lamenting ...

     (Portion of letter missing)

Belovedest, almost my first glance, on entering our parlor after my
return hither, was at the pictures--my very first glance, indeed, as
soon as I had lighted the lamps. They have certainly grown more
beautiful during my absence, and are still becoming more perfect, and
perfecter, and perfectest. I fancied that Sophie Hawthorne, as she
stands on the bridge, had slightly turned her head, so as to reveal
somewhat more of her face; but if so, she has since turned it back
again. I was much struck with the Menaggio this morning;--while I was
gazing at it, the sunshine and the shade grew positively real, and I
agreed with you, for the time, in thinking this a more superlative
picture than the other. But when I came home about an hour ago, I
bestowed my chiefest attention upon the Isola; and now I believe it
has the first place in my affections, though without prejudice to a
very fervent love for the other.

... Dove, there is little prospect for me, indeed; but forgive me for
telling you so, dearest--no prospect of my returning so soon as next
Monday; but I have good hope to be again at liberty by the close of
the week. Do be very good, my Dove--be as good as your nature will
permit, naughty Sophie Hawthorne. As to myself, I shall take the
liberty to torment myself as much as I please.

My dearest, I am very well, but exceedingly stupid and heavy; so the
remainder of this letter shall be postponed until tomorrow. Has my
Dove flown abroad, this cold, bright day? Would that the wind would
snatch her up, and waft her to her husband.

How was it, dearest? And how do you do this morning? Is the wind east?
The sun shone on the chimney-tops round about here, a few minutes ago;
and I hoped that there would be a pleasant day for my Dove to take
wing, and for Sophie Hawthorne to ride on horseback; but the sky
seems to be growing sullen now. Do you wish to know how your husband
will spend the day? First of the first--but there rings the bell for
eight o'clock; and I must go down to breakfast.

After breakfast;--First of the first, your husband will go to the
Post-Office, like a dutiful husband as he is, to put in this letter
for his belovedest wife. Thence he will proceed to the Custom House,
and finding that there is no call for him on the wharves, he will sit
down by the Measurers' fire, and read the Morning Post. Next, at about
half past nine o'clock, he will go to the Athenaeum, and turn over the
Magazines and Reviews till eleven or twelve, when it will be time to
return to the Custom-House to see whether there be a letter from Dove
Hawthorne--and also (though this is of far less importance) to see
whether there be any demand for his services as Measurer. At one
o'clock, or thereabouts, he will go to dinner--but first, perhaps, he
will promenade the whole length of Washington street, to get himself
an appetite. After dinner, he will take one more peep at the
Custom-House, and it being by this time about two o'clock, and no
prospect of business to-day, he will feel at liberty to come home to
our own parlor, there to remain till supper-time. At six o'clock he
will sally forth again, to get some oysters and read the evening
papers, and returning between seven and eight, he will read and
re-read his belovedest's letter--then take up a book--and go to bed at
ten, with a blessing on his lips for the Dove and Sophie Hawthorne.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, March 15th, 1840--Forenoon.

     _Best-belovedest_,

Thy letter by Elizabeth came, I believe, on Thursday, and the two
which thou didst entrust to the post reached me not till
yesterday--whereby I enjoyed a double blessing in recompense of the
previous delay. Nevertheless, it were desirable that the new Salem
postmaster be forthwith ejected, for taking upon himself to withhold
the outpourings of thy heart, at their due season. As for letters of
business, which involve merely the gain or loss of a few thousand
dollars, let him be as careless as he pleases; but when thou wouldst
utter thyself to thy husband, dearest wife, there is doubtless a
peculiar fitness of thy communications to that point and phase of our
existence, at which they ought to be received. However, come when they
will, they are sure to make sweetest music with my heart-strings.

Blessedest, what an ugly day is this!--and there thou sittest as heavy
as thy husband's heart. And is his heart indeed heavy? Why no--it is
not heaviness--not the heaviness, like a great lump of ice, which I
used to feel when I was alone in the world--but--but--in short,
dearest, where thou art not, there it is a sort of death. A death,
however, in which there is still hope and assurance of a joyful life
to come. Methinks, if my spirit were not conscious of thy spirit, this
dreary snow-storm would chill me to torpor;--the warmth of my fireside
would be quite powerless to counteract it. Most absolute little wife,
didst thou expressly command me to go to Father Taylor's church this
very Sabbath?--(Dinner, or luncheon rather, has intervened since the
last sentence)--Now, belovedest, it would not be an auspicious day for
me to hear the aforesaid Son of Thunder. Thou knowest not how
difficult is thy husband to be touched or moved, unless time, and
circumstances, and his own inward state, be in a "concatenation
accordingly." A dreadful thing would it be, were Father Taylor to fail
in awakening a sympathy from my spirit to thine. Darlingest, pray let
me stay at home this afternoon. Some sunshiny Sunday, when I am wide
awake, and warm, and genial, I will go and throw myself open to his
blessed influences; but now, there is but one thing (thou being
absent) which I feel anywise inclined to do--and that is, to go to
sleep. May I go to sleep, belovedest? Think what sweet dreams of thee
may visit me--think how I shall escape this snow-storm--think how my
heavy mood will change, as the mood of mind almost always does, during
the interval that withdraws me from the external world. Yes; thou
bidst me sleep. Sleep thou too, my beloved--let us pass at one and the
same moment into that misty region, and embrace each other there.

Well, dearest, I have slept; but Sophie Hawthorne has been
naughty--she would not be dreamed about. And now that I am awake
again, here are the same snow-flakes in the air, that were descending
when I went to sleep. Would that there were an art of making sunshine!
Knowest thou any such art? Truly thou dost, my blessedest, and hast
often thrown a heavenly sunshine around thy husband's spirit, when all
things else were full of gloom. What a woe--what a cloud it is, to be
away from thee! How would my Dove like to have her husband continually
with her, twelve or fourteen months out of the next twenty? Would not
that be real happiness?--in such long communion, should we not feel as
if separation were a dream, something that never had been a reality,
nor ever could be? Yes; but--for in all earthly happiness there is a
but--but, during those twenty months, there would be two intervals of
three months each, when thy husband would be five hundred miles
away--as far away as Washington. That would be terrible. Would not
Sophie Hawthorne fight against it?--would not the Dove fold her wings,
not in the quietude of bliss, but of despair? Do not be frightened,
dearest--nor rejoiced either--for the thing will not be. It might be,
if I chose; but on multitudinous accounts, my present situation seems
preferable; and I do pray, that, in one year more, I may find some way
of escaping from this unblest Custom-House; for it is a very grievous
thraldom. I do detest all offices--all, at least, that are held on a
political tenure. And I want nothing to do with politicians--they are
not men; they cease to be men, in becoming politicians. Their hearts
wither away, and die out of their bodies. Their consciences are turned
to India-rubber--or to some substance as black as that, and which will
stretch as much. One thing, if no more, I have gained by my
Custom-House experience--to know a politician. It is a knowledge which
no previous thought, or power of sympathy, could have taught me,
because the animal, or the machine rather, is not in nature.

Oh my darlingest wife, thy husband's soul yearns to embrace thee! Thou
art his hope--his joy--he desires nothing but to be with thee, and to
toil for thee, and to make thee a happy wife, wherein would consist
his own heavenliest happiness. Dost thou love him? Yes; he knoweth it.
God bless thee, most beloved.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


(Fragment only)

And now good night, best, beautifullest, belovedest, blessingest of
wives. Notwithstanding what I have said of the fleeting and
unsatisfying bliss of dreams, still, if thy husband's prayers and
wishes can bring thee, or even a shadow of thee, into his sleep, thou
or thy image will assuredly be there. Good night, ownest. I bid thee
good night, although it is still early in the evening; because I must
reserve the rest of the page to greet thee upon in the morning.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, March 26th, 1840--Afternoon.

     _Thou dearest wife_,

Here is thy husband, yearning for thee with his whole heart--thou,
meanwhile, being fast asleep, and perhaps hovering around him in thy
dreams. Very dreary are the first few centuries which elapse after our
separations, and before it is time to look forward hopefully to
another meeting--these are the "dark ages." And hast thou been very
good, my beloved? Dost thou dwell in the past and in the future, so
that the gloomy present is quite swallowed up in sunshine? Do so, mine
ownest, for the sake of thy husband, whose desire it is to make thy
whole life as sunny as the scene beyond those high, dark rocks of the
Menaggio.

Dearest, my thoughts will not flow at all--they are as sluggish as a
stream of half-cold lava. Methinks I could sleep an hour or
two--perhaps thou art calling to me, out of the midst of thy dream, to
come and join thee there. I will take a book, and lie down awhile,
and perhaps resume my pen in the evening. I will not say good bye; for
I am coming to thee now.

March 27th,--Before breakfast.--Good morning, most belovedest. I felt
so infinitely stupid, after my afternoon's nap, that I could not
possibly write another word; and it has required a whole night's sleep
to restore me the moderate share of intellect and vivacity that
naturally belongs to me. Dearest, thou didst not come into my dreams,
last night; but, on the contrary, I was engaged in assisting the
escape of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette from Paris, during the French
revolution. And sometimes, by an unaccountable metamorphosis, it
seemed as if my mother and sister were in the place of the King and
Queen. I think that fairies rule over our dreams--beings who have no
true reason or true feeling, but mere fantasies instead of those
endowments.

Afternoon.--Blessedest, I do think that it is the doom laid upon me,
of murdering so many of the brightest hours of the day at that unblest
Custom-House, that makes such havoc with my wits; for here I am again,
trying to write worthily to my etherealest, and intellectualest, and
feelingest, and imaginativest wife, yet with a sense as if all the
noblest part of man had been left out of my composition--or had
decayed out of it, since my nature was given to my own keeping.
Sweetest Dove, shouldst thou once venture within those precincts, the
atmosphere would immediately be fatal to thee--thy wings would cease
to flutter in a moment--scarcely wouldst thou have time to nestle into
thy husband's bosom, ere thy pure spirit would leave what is mortal of
thee there, and flit away to Heaven. Never comes any bird of Paradise
into that dismal region. A salt, or even a coal-ship is ten million
times preferable; for there the sky is above me, and the fresh breeze
around me, and my thoughts, having hardly anything to do with my
occupation, are as free as air.

Nevertheless, belovedest, thou art not to fancy that the above
paragraph gives thee a correct idea of thy husband's mental and
spiritual state; for he is sometimes prone to the sin of exaggeration.
It is only once in a while that the image and desire of a better and
happier life makes him feel the iron of his chain; for after all, a
human spirit may find no insufficiency of food fit for it, even in the
Custom-House. And with such materials as these, I do think, and feel,
and learn things that are worth knowing, and which I should not know
unless I had learned them there; so that the present portion of my
life shall not be quite left out of the sum of my real existence.
Moreover, I live through my Dove's heart--I live an intellectual life
in Sophie Hawthorne. Therefore ought those two in one to keep
themselves happy and healthy in mind and feelings, inasmuch as they
enjoy more blessed influences than their husband, and likewise have to
provide happiness and moral health for him.

Very dearest, I feel a great deal better now--nay, nothing whatever is
the matter. What a foolish husband hast thou, misfortunate little
Dove, that he will grieve thee with such a long Jeremiad, and after
all find out that there is not the slightest cause for lamentation.
But so it must often be, dearest--this trouble hast thou entailed upon
thyself, by yielding to become my wife. Every cloud that broods
beneath my sky, or that I even fancy is brooding there, must dim thy
sunshine too. But here is no real cloud. It is good for me, on many
accounts, that my life has had this passage in it. Thou canst not
think how much more I know than I did a year ago--what a stronger
sense I have of power to act as a man among men--what worldly wisdom I
have gained, and wisdom also that is not altogether of this world. And
when I quit this earthy cavern, where I am now buried, nothing will
cling to me that ought to be left behind. Men will not perceive, I
trust, by my look, or the tenor of my thoughts and feelings, that I
have been a Custom-House officer.

Belovedest!--what an awful concussion was that of our two heads. It
was as if two worlds had rushed together--as if the Moon (thou art my
Moon, gentlest wife) had met in fierce encounter with the rude,
rock-promontoried Earth. Dearest, art thou sure that thy delicatest
brain has suffered no material harm? A maiden's heart, they say, is
often bruised and broken by her lover's cruelty; it was reserved for
naughtiest me to inflict those injuries upon my mistress's head....

     (Portion of letter missing)

     To Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, March 30th, 1840--5 or 6 P.M.

     _Infinitely belovedest_,

Thy Thursday's letter came not till Saturday--so long was thy faith
fullest husband defrauded of his rights! Thou mayst imagine how hungry
was my heart, when at last it came. Thy yesterday's letter, for a
wonder, arrived in its due season, this forenoon; and I could not
refrain from opening it immediately; and then and there, in that
earthy cavern of the Custom-House, and surrounded by all those
brawling slang-whangers, I held sweet communion with my Dove. Dearest,
I do not believe that any one of those miserable men ever received a
letter which uttered a single word of love and faith--which addressed
itself in any manner to the soul. No beautiful and holy woman's spirit
came to visit any of them, save thy husband. How blest is he! Thou
findest thy way to him in all dismallest and unloveliest places, and
talkest with him there, nor can the loudest babble nor rudest clamor
shut out thy gentle voice from his ear. Truly, he ought not to bemoan
himself any more, as in his last letter, but to esteem himself favored
beyond all other mortals;--but truly he is a wayward and incalculable
personage, and will not be prevailed with to know his own happiness.
The lovelier thou art, mine ownest, the more doth thy unreasonable
husband discontent himself to be away from thee, though thou
continually sendest him all of thyself that can be breathed into
written words. Oh, I want thee with me forever and ever!--at least I
would always have the feeling, amid the tumult and unsuitable
associations of the day, that the night would bring me to my home of
peace and rest--to thee, my fore-ordained wife. Well--be patient,
heart! The time will come. Meantime, foolishest heart, be thankful for
the much of happiness thou already hast.

Dearest, thy husband was very reprehensible, yesterday. Wilt thou
again forgive him? He went not to hear Father Taylor preach. In truth,
his own private and quiet room did have such a charm for him, after
being mixed and tossed together with discordant elements all the week,
that he thought his Dove would grant him indulgence for one more
Sabbath. Also, he fancied himself unfit to go out, on account of a
cold; though, as the disease has quite disappeared to-day, I am afraid
he conjured it up to serve his naughty purpose. But, indeed, dearest,
I feel somewhat afraid to hear this divine Father Taylor, lest my
sympathy with thy admiration of him should be colder and feebler than
thou lookest for. Belovedest wife, our souls are in happiest unison;
but we must not disquiet ourselves if every tone be not re-echoed from
one to the other--if every slightest shade be not reflected in the
alternate mirror. Our broad and general sympathy is enough to secure
our bliss, without our following it into minute details. Wilt thou
promise not to be troubled, should thy husband be unable to appreciate
the excellence of Father Taylor? Promise me this; and at some
auspicious hour, which I trust will soon arrive, Father Taylor shall
have an opportunity to make music with my soul. But I forewarn thee,
sweetest Dove, that thy husband is a most unmalleable man;--thou art
not to suppose, because his spirit answers to every touch of thine,
that therefore every breeze, or even every whirlwind, can upturn him
from his depths. Well, dearest, I have said my say, on this matter.

What a rain is this, my poor little Dove! Yet as the wind comes from
some other quarter than the East, I trust that thou hast found it
genial. Good bye, belovedest, till tomorrow evening. Meantime, love
me, and dream of me.

March 31st.--Evening.--Best Wife, it is scarcely dark yet; but thy
husband has just lighted his lamps, and sits down to talk to thee.
Would that he could hear an answer in thine own sweet voice; for his
spirit needs to be cheered by that dearest of all harmonies, after a
long, listless, weary day. Just at this moment, it does seem as if
life could not go on without it. What is to be done?

Dearest, if Elizabeth Howe is to be with you on Saturday, it would be
quite a calamity to thee and thy household, for me to come at the same
time. Now will Sophie Hawthorne complain, and the Dove's eyes be
suffused, at my supposing that their husband's visit could be a
calamity at any time. Well, at least, we should be obliged to give up
many hours of happiness, and it would not even be certain that I could
have the privilege of seeing mine own wife in private, at all.
Wherefore, considering these things, I have resolved, and do hereby
make it a decree of fate, that my present widowhood shall continue one
week longer. And my sweetest Dove--yes, and naughtiest Sophie
Hawthorne too--will both concur in the fitness of this resolution, and
will help me to execute it with what of resignation is attainable by
mortal man, by writing me a letter full of strength and comfort. And
I, infinitely dear wife, will write to thee again; so that, though my
earthly part will not be with thee on Saturday, yet thou shalt have my
heart and soul in a letter. Will not this be right, and for the best?
"Yes, dearest husband," saith my meekest little Dove; and Sophie
Hawthorne cannot gainsay her.

Mine unspeakably ownest, dost thou love me a million of times as much
as thou didst a week ago? As for me, my heart grows deeper and wider
every moment, and still thou fillest it in all its depths and
boundlessness. Wilt thou never be satisfied with making me love thee?
To what use canst thou put so much love as thou continually receivest
from me? Dost thou hoard it up, as misers do their treasure?

     THINE OWN BLESSEDEST HUSBAND.

April 1st. Before breakfast.--Good morning, entirely belovedest.

Sophie Hawthorne, I have enclosed something for thee in this letter.
If thou findest it not, then tell me what thou art.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 3d, 1840.--Evening.

Blessedest wife, thy husband has been busy all day, from early
breakfast-time to late in the afternoon; and old Father Time has gone
onward somewhat less heavily, than is his wont when I am imprisoned
within the walls of the Custom-House. It has been a brisk, breezy day,
as thou knowest--an effervescent atmosphere; and I have enjoyed it in
all its freshness, breathing air which had not been breathed in
advance by the hundred thousand pairs of lungs which have common and
indivisible property in the atmosphere of this great city.--My breath
had never belonged to anybody but me. It came fresh from the
wilderness of ocean. My Dove ought to have shared it with me, and so
have made it infinitely sweeter--save her, I would wish to have an
atmosphere all to myself. And, dearest, it was exhilarating to see the
vessels, how they bounded over the waves, while a sheet of foam broke
out around them. I found a good deal of enjoyment, too, in the busy
scene around me; for several vessels were disgorging themselves (what
an unseemly figure is this--"disgorge," quotha, as if the vessels were
sick at their stomachs) on the wharf; and everybody seemed to be
working with might and main. It pleased thy husband to think that he
also had a part to act in the material and tangible business of this
life, and that a part of all this industry could not have gone on
without his presence. Nevertheless, my belovedest, pride not thyself
too much on thy husband's activity and utilitarianism; he is naturally
an idler, and doubtless will soon be pestering thee with bewailments
at being compelled to earn his bread by taking some little share in
the toils of mortal man.

Most beloved, when I went to the Custom-House, at one o'clock, Colonel
Hall held up a letter, turning the seal towards me; and he seemed to
be quite as well aware as myself, that the long-legged little fowl
impressed thereon was a messenger from my Dove. And so, naughtiest,
thou art not patient. Well; it will do no good to scold thee. I know
Sophie Hawthorne of old--yea, of very old time do I know her; or
rather, of very old eternity. There was an image of such a being, deep
within my soul, before we met in this dim world; and therefore
nothing that she does, or says, or thinks, or feels, ever surprises
me. Her naughtiness is as familiar to me as if it were my own. But
dearest, do be patient; because thou seest that the busy days are
coming again; and how is thy husband to bear his toil lightsomely, if
he knows that thou art impatient and disquieted. By and bye, as soon
as God will open a way to us, we will help one another bear the
burthen of the day, whatever it may be.

My little Dove, the excellent Colonel Hall, conceiving, I suppose,
that our correspondence must necessarily involve a great expenditure
of paper, has imparted to thy husband a quire or two of superfine
gilt-edged, which he brought from Congress. The sheet on which I am
now writing is a specimen; and he charged me to give thee a portion of
it, which I promised to do--but whether I shall convey it to thee in
the mass, or sheet by sheet, after spoiling it with my uncouth
scribble, is yet undetermined. Which wouldst thou prefer? Likewise
three sticks of sealing-[wax] did the good Colonel bestow; but
unfortunately it is all red. Yet I think it proper enough that a
gentleman should seal all his letters with red sealing-wax; though it
is sweet and graceful in my Dove to use fancy-colored. Dearest, the
paper thou shalt have, every sheet of it, sooner or later; and only
that it is so burthensome to thy foolish husband to carry anything in
his hand, I would bring it to thee. Meantime, till I hit upon some
other method, I will send it sheet by sheet.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Custom-House_, April 6th, 1840. 5 P.M.

How long it is, belovedest, since I have written thee a letter from
this darksome region. Never did I write thee a word from hence that
was worth reading, nor shall I now; but perhaps thou wouldst get no
word at all, these two or three days, unless I write it here. This
evening, dearest, I am to have a visitor--the illustrious Colonel Hall
himself; and I have even promised him a bed on my parlor floor--so
that, as thou seest, the duties of hospitality will keep me from
communion with the best little wife in the world.

Hearts never do understand the mystery of separation--that is the
business of the head. My sweetest, dearest, purest, holiest, noblest,
faithfullest wife, dost thou know what a loving husband thou hast?
Dost thou love him most immensely?--beyond conception, and dost thou
feel, as he does, that every new throb of love is worth all other
happiness in the world?

Dearest, my soul drank thy letter this forenoon, and has been
conscious of it ever since, in the midst of business and noise and all
sorts of wearisome babble. How dreamlike it makes all my external
life, this continual thought and deepest, inmostest musing upon thee!
I live only within myself; for thou art always there. Thou makest me a
disembodied spirit; and with the eve of a spirit, I look on all
worldly things--and this it [is] that separates thy husband from those
who seem to be his fellows--therefore is he "among them, but not of
them." Thou art transfused into his heart, and spread all round about
it; and it is only once in a while that he himself is even imperfectly
conscious of what a miracle has been wrought upon him.

Well, dearest, were ever such words as these written in a Custom-House
before? Oh, and what a mighty heave my heart has given, this very
moment! Thou art most assuredly thinking of me now, wife of my inmost
bosom. Never did I know what love was before--I did not even know it
when I began this letter. Ah, but I ought not to say that; it would
make me sad to believe that I had not always loved thee. Farewell,
now, dearest. Be quiet, my Dove; lest my heart be made to flutter by
the fluttering of thy wings.

April 7th. 6 P.M. My tenderest Dove, hast thou lived through the polar
winter of to-day; for it does appear to me to have been the most
uncomfortable day that ever was inflicted on poor mortals. Thy husband
has had to face it in all its terrors; and the cold has penetrated
through his cloak, through his beaver-cloth coat and vest, and was
neutralised nowhere but in the region round about his heart--and that
it did not chill him even there, he owes to thee. I know not whether I
should not have jumped overboard in despair today, if I had not
sustained my spirit by the thought of thee, most beloved wife; for,
besides the bleak, unkindly air, I have been plagued by two sets of
coal-shovellers at the same time, and have had to keep two separate
tallies simultaneously. But, dearest, I was conscious that all this
was merely a vision and a phantasy, and that, in reality, I was not
half-frozen by the bitter blast, nor plagued to death by those grimy
coal-heavers, but that I was basking quietly in the sunshine of
eternity, with mine own Dove. Any sort of bodily and earthly torment
may serve to make us sensible that we have a soul that is not within
the jurisdiction of such shadowy demons--it separates the immortal
within us from the mortal. But the wind has blown my brain into such
confusion that I cannot philosophise now.

Blessingest wife, what a habit I have contracted of late, of telling
thee all my grievances and annoyances, as if such trifles were worth
telling--or as if, supposing them to be so, they would be the most
agreeable gossip in the world to thee. Thou makest me behave like a
child, naughtiest. Why dost thou not frown at my nonsensical
complaints, and utterly refuse thy sympathy? But I speak to thee of
the miseries of a cold day, and blustering wind, and intractable
coal-shovellers, with just the same certainty that thou wilt listen
lovingly and sympathisingly, as if I were speaking of the momentous
and permanent concerns of life.

Dearest, ... (portion of letter missing)

I do not think that I can come on Friday--there is hardly any
likelihood of it; for one of the Measurers is indisposed, which throws
additional work on the efficient members of our honorable body. But
there is no expressing how I do yearn for thee! The strength of the
feeling seems to make my words cold and tame. Dearest, this is but a
poor epistle, yet is written in very great love and worship of
thee--so, for the writer's sake, thou wilt receive it into thy heart
of hearts. God keep thee--and me also for thy sake.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 15th, 1840.--Afternoon.

Belovedest--since writing this word, I have made a considerable pause;
for, dearest, my mind has no activity to-day. I would fain sit still,
and let thoughts, feelings, and images of thee, pass before me and
through me, without my putting them into words, or taking any other
trouble about the matter. It must be that thou dost not especially and
exceedingly need a letter from me; else I should feel an impulse and
necessity to write. I do wish, most beloved wife, that there were some
other method of communing with thee at a distance; for really this is
not a natural one to thy husband. In truth, I never use words, either
with the tongue or pen, when I can possibly express myself in any
other way;--and how much, dearest, may be expressed without the
utterance of a word! Is there not a volume in many of our
glances?--even in a pressure of the hand? And when I write to thee,
I do but painfully endeavor to shadow into words what has already been
expressed in those realities. In heaven, I am very sure, there will be
no occasion for words;--our minds will enter into each other, and
silently possess themselves of their natural riches. Even in this
world, I think, such a process is not altogether impossible--we
ourselves have experienced it--but words come like an earthy wall
betwixt us. Then our minds are compelled to stand apart, and make
signals of our meaning, instead of rushing into one another, and
holding converse in an infinite and eternal language. Oh, dearest,
have [not] the moments of our oneness been those in which we were most
silent? It is our instinct to be silent then, because words could not
adequately express the perfect concord of our hearts, and therefore
would infringe upon it. Well, ownest, good bye till tomorrow, when
perhaps thy husband will feel a necessity to use even such a wretched
medium as words, to tell thee how he loves thee. No words can tell it
now.

April 15th. Afternoon.--Most dear wife, never was thy husband gladder
to receive a letter from thee than to-day. And so thou didst perceive
that I was rather out of spirits on Monday. Foolish and faithless
husband that I was, I supposed that thou wouldst not take any notice
of it; but the simple fact was, that I did not feel quite so well as
usual; and said nothing about it to thee, because I knew thou wouldst
desire me to put off my departure, which (for such a trifle) I felt it
not right to do--and likewise, because my Dove would have been
naughty, and so perhaps have made herself ten times as ill as her
husband. Dearest, I am quite well now--only very hungry; for I have
thought fit to eat very little for two days past; and I think
starvation is a remedy for almost all physical evils. You will love
Colonel Hall, when I tell you that he has not let me do a ... (few
words missing) ... and even to-day he has sent me home to my room,
although I assured him that I was perfectly able to work. Now,
dearest, it thou givest thyself any trouble and torment about this
past indisposition of mine, I shall never dare to tell thee about my
future incommodities; but if I were sure thou wouldst estimate them at
no more than they are worth, thou shouldst know them all, even to the
slightest prick of my finger. It is my impulse to complain to thee in
all griefs, great and small; and I will not check that impulse, if
thou wilt sympathise reasonably, as well as most lovingly. And now,
ownest wife, believe that thy husband is well;--better, I fear, than
thou, who art tired to death, and hast even had the headache.
Naughtiest, dost thou think that all the busts in the world, and all
the medallions and other forms of sculpture, would be worth creating
at the expence of such weariness and headaches to thee. I would rather
that thy art should be annihilated, than that thou shouldst always pay
this price for its exercise. But perhaps, when thou hast my bosom to
repose upon, thou wilt no longer feel such overwhelming weariness. I
am given thee to repose upon, that so my most tender and sensitivest
little Dove may be able to do great works.

And dearest, I do by no means undervalue thy works, though I cannot
estimate all thou hast ever done at the price of a single throb of
anguish to thy belovedest head. But thou has achieved mighty things.
Thou hast called up a face which was hidden in the grave--hast
re-created it, after it was resolved to dust--and so hast snatched
from Death his victory. I wonder at thee, my beloved. Thou art a
miracle thyself, and workest miracles. I would not have believed it
possible to do what thou hast done--to restore the lineaments of the
dead so perfectly that even she who loved him so well can require
nothing more;--and this too, when thou hadst hardly known his living
face. Thou couldst not have done it, unless God had helped thee. This
surely was inspiration, and of the holiest kind, and for one of the
holiest purposes.

Dearest, I shall long to see thee exceedingly next Saturday; but
having been absent from duty for two or three days past it will not be
right for me to ask any more time so soon. Dost thou think it would?

How naughty was thy husband to waste the first page of this letter in
declaiming against the blessed art of writing! I do not see how I
could live without it;--thy letters are my heart's food; and
oftentimes my heart absolutely insists upon pouring itself out on
paper, for thy perusal. In truth, if the heart would do all the work,
I should probably write to thee the whole time of my absence; but thou
knowest that the co-operation of the hand and head are indispensable;
and they, not being able to comprehend the infinite necessity of the
heart's finding utterance, are sometimes sluggish.

April 17th.--Before breakfast.--Ownest, I am perfectly well this
morning. Dost thou love me? Dearest, expect not another letter till
Tuesday. Is thy weariness quite gone?

     THINE OWNEST, OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 19th, 1840.--Forenoon.

Dearest, there came no letter from thee yesterday; and I have been a
little disquieted with fears that thou art not well and art naughty
enough to conceal it from thy husband. But this is a misdemeanor of
which my Dove ought not to be lightly suspected. Or perhaps, ownest
wife, thou didst imagine that I might mean to surprise thee by a
visit, last evening, and therefore, instead of writing, didst hope to
commune with me in living words. Best belovedest, if I could have
come, I would have given thee notice beforehand; for I love not
surprises, even joyful ones--or at least, I would rather that joy
should come quietly, and as a matter of course, and warning us of its
approach by casting a placid gleam before it. Mine own wife, art thou
very well? Thy husband is so, only love-sick--a disease only to be
cured by the pressure of a certain heart to his own heart.

Belovedest, what a beautiful day was yesterday. Wert thou abroad in
the sky and air? Thy husband's spirit did rebel against being confined
in his darksome dungeon, at the Custom-House; it seemed a sin--a
murder of the joyful young day--a quenching of the sunshine.
Nevertheless, there he was kept a prisoner,--till it was too late to
fling himself on a gentle wind and be blown away into the country. I
foresee, dearest, that thou wilt, now that the pleasant days of May
and June are coming, be tormented quite beyond thine infinite
patience, with my groans and lamentations at being compelled to lose
so much of life's scanty summertime. But thou must enjoy for both of
us. Thou must listen to the notes of the birds, because the rumbling
of wheels will be always in my ears--thou must fill thyself with the
fragrance of wild flowers, because I must breathe in the dust of the
city--thy spirit must enjoy a double share of freedom, because thy
husband is doomed to be a captive. It is thine office now, most sweet
wife, to make all the additions that may be made to our common stock
of enjoyment. By and bye, there shall not be so heavy burthen imposed
upon thee. When I shall be again free, I will enjoy all things with
the fresh simplicity of a child of five years old; thou shalt find
thine husband grown young again, made over all anew--he will go
forth and stand in a summer shower, and all the worldly dust that has
collected on him shall be washed away at once. Then, dearest, whenever
thou art aweary, thou shalt lie down upon his heart as upon a bank of
fresh flowers.

Nearly 6--P.M. Thy husband went out to walk, dearest, about an hour
ago, and found it very pleasant, though there was a somewhat cool
wind. I went round and across the common, and stood on the highest
point of it, whence I could see miles and miles into the country.
Blessed be God for this green tract, and the view which it affords;
whereby we poor citizens may be put in mind, sometimes, that all God's
earth is not composed of brick blocks of houses, and of stone or
wooden pavements. Blessed be God for the sky too; though the smoke of
the city may somewhat change its aspect--but still it is better than
if each street were covered over with a roof. There were a good many
people walking on the mall, mechanicks apparently and shopkeepers'
clerks, with their wives and sweethearts; and boys were rolling on the
grass--and thy husband would have liked to lie down and roll too.
Wouldst thou not have been ashamed of him? And, Oh, dearest, thou
shouldst have been there, to help me to enjoy the green grass, and the
far-off hills and fields--to teach me how to enjoy them, for when I
view Nature without thee, I feel that I lack a sense. When we are
together, thy whole mind and fancy, as well as thy whole heart, is
mine; so that all thy impressions from earth, sea, and sky, are added
to all mine. How necessary hast thou made thyself to thy husband, my
little Dove! When he is weary and out of spirits, his heart yearneth
for thee; and when he is among pleasant scenes, he requireth thee so
much the more.

My dearest, why didst thou not write to me, yesterday? It were always
advisable, methinks, to arrange matters so that a letter may be sent
on each Saturday, when I am not coming home; because Sunday leaves me
free to muse upon thee, and to imagine the state and circumstances in
which thou art--and the present Sunday I have been troubled with
fancies that thou art ill of body or ill at ease in mind. Do not thou
have any such foolish fancies about me, mine ownest. Oh, how we find,
at every moment of our lives, that we ought always to be together!
Then there would be none of these needless heartquakes; but now how
can they be avoided, when we mutually feel that one-half our being is
wandering away by itself, without the guidance and guard of the other
half! Well; it will not be always so. Doubtless, God has planned how
to make us happy; but thy husband, being of a rebellious and
distrustful nature, cannot help wishing sometimes that our Father
would let him into His plans.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, April 21st, 1840.--Custom-House.

I do trust, my dearest, that thou hast been enjoying this bright day
for both of us; for thy husband has spent it in his dungeon--and the
only ray of light that broke upon him, was when he opened thy letter.
Belovedest, I have folded it to my heart, and ever and anon it sends a
thrill through me; for thou hast steeped it with thy love--it seems as
if thy head were leaning against my breast. I long to get home, that I
may read it again and again; for in this uncongenial region, I can but
half comprehend it--at least, I feel that there is a richness and
sweetness in it, too sacred to be enjoyed, save in privacy. Dearest
wife, thy poor husband is sometimes driven to wish that thou and he
could mount upon a cloud (as we used to fancy in those heavenly walks
of ours) and be borne quite out of sight and hearing of all the
world;--then, at last, our souls might melt into each other; but now,
all the people in the world seem to come between us. How happy were
Adam and Eve! There was no third person to come between them, and all
the infinity around them only served to press their hearts closer
together. We love [one] another as well as they: but there is no
silent and lovely garden of Eden for us. Mine own, wilt thou sail away
with me to discover some summer island?--dost thou not think that God
has reserved one for us, ever since the beginning of the world? Ah,
foolish husband that I am, to raise a question of it, when we have
found such an Eden, such an island sacred to us two, whenever, whether
in Mrs. Quincy's boudoir, or anywhere else, we have been clasped in
one another's arms! That holy circle shuts out all the world--then we
are the Adam and Eve of a virgin earth. Now good-bye dearest; for
voices are babbling around me, and I should not wonder if thou wert
to hear the echo of them, while thou readest this letter.

April 22d--6 o'clock P.M. To-day, dearest, I have been measuring salt,
on Long-Wharf; and though considerably weary, I feel better satisfied
than if I had been murdering the blessed day at the Custom-House. Mine
own wife, how very good wast thou, to take me with thee on that sweet
walk, last Monday! And how kind-hearted was that sensible old stump!
Thou enquirest whether I ever heard a stump speak before. No, indeed;
but "stump-speeches" (as thou mayst learn in the newspapers) are very
common in the western country. Belovedest, I have met with an immense
misfortune. Dost thou sympathise from the bottom of thy heart? Wouldst
thou take it upon thyself, if possible? Yea; I know thou wouldst, even
without asking the nature of it; and truth to tell, I could be selfish
enough to wish that thou mightest share it with me. Now art thou all
in a fever of anxiety! I feel the fluttering of thy foolish little
heart. Shall I tell thee? No.--Yes; I will. I have received an
invitation to a party at General McNeil's, next Friday evening. Why
will not people let your poor persecuted husband alone? What possible
good can it do for me to thrust my coal-begrimed visage and
salt-befrosted locks into good society? What claim have I to be
there--a humble Measurer, a subordinate Custom-House officer, as I am!
I cannot go. I will not go. I intend to pass that evening with my
wife--that is to say, in musings and dreams of her, and moreover, it
was an exceeding breach of etiquette, that this belovedest wife was
not included in the invitation.

My duties began at sunrise, after a somewhat scanty night's rest;
for George Hillard and his brother, from London, came to see me, when
I was preparing to go [to] bed; and I was kept up pretty late. But I
came home at about four o'clock, and straightway went to bed! What a
sinful way was that of misusing this summer afternoon! I trust, most
dear wife, that the better half of my being has drawn from the sweet
day all the honey that it contained. I feel as if it were not so much
matter, now, whether my days pass pleasantly or irksomely, since thou
canst be living a golden life for both of us. Sometime or other, we
will contribute each an equal share of enjoyment.

Dearest, thou knowest not how I have yearned for thee. And now there
is but one day more of widowhood! Sophie Hawthorne must not expect me
any more on Fridays, till the busy season is over. If I can always
come on the appointed Saturday, it will be a great mercy of Heaven;
but I trust in Heaven's goodness, and the instrumentality of Colonel
Hall. Now God bless thee, ownest wife. God bless us.

     To Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, May 15th, 1840.

     _Darlingest_,

I did not reach home last night till candle-light, and then I was
beyond expression weary and spiritless; and I could as soon have
climbed into Heaven without a ladder, as to come to see thee at Mrs.
Park's. So, instead of dressing to pay a visit, I undressed and went
to bed; but yet I doubt whether I ought not to have gone, for I was
restless and wakeful a great part of the night; and it seemed as if I
had scarcely fallen asleep, when I awoke with a start, and saw the
gray dawn creeping over the roofs of the houses. So then it was
necessary for thy poor husband to leave his pillow, without enjoying
that half-dreaming interval which I so delight to devote to thee.
However the fresh morning air made a new creature of me; and all day I
have felt tolerably lively and cheerful--as much so as is anywise
consistent with this intolerable position of near distance, or
distant nearness, in which we now find ourselves. Truly Providence
does not seem to have smiled on this visit of thine, my dearest. The
dispensation is somewhat hard to bear. There is a weight and a gnawing
at my heart; but, belovedest, do let thy heart be cheerful, for thy
husband's sake.

Very reviving to me was thy letter, mine ownest. Colonel Hall brought
it at noon to the eating-house where we had agreed to dine together;
and I forthwith opened it and read it while my beefsteak was broiling.
It refreshed me much more than my dinner--which is a great deal for a
hungry man to say. Dearest, I am in admirable health; it is not the
nature of my present mode of life to make me sick; and my nightly
weariness does not betoken anything of that kind. Each day, it is
true, exhausts all the life and animation that there is in me; but
each night restores as much as will be required for the expenditure of
the next day. I think this week has been about as tough as any that I
ever experienced. I feel the burthen of such constant occupation the
more sensibly, from having had so many idle intervals of late.

Oh, dearest, do not thou tire thyself to death. Whenever thou feelest
weary, then oughtest thou to glide away from all the world; and go to
sleep with the thought of thy husband in thy heart. Why do not
people know better what is requisite for a Dove, than thus to keep her
wings fluttering all day long, never allowing her a moment to fold
them in peace and quietness? I am anxious for thee, mine ownest wife.
When I have the sole charge of thee, these things shall not be.

Belovedest, didst thou not bless this shower? It caused thy husband's
labors to cease for the day, though it confined him in the cabin of
the salt-ship till it was over; but when the drops came few and far
between, I journeyed hither to our parlor, and began this scribble.
Really I did not think my ideas would be alert enough to write half so
much; but I have scrawled one line after another; and now I feel much
revived, and soothed and cheered in mind. I shall sleep the more
quietly, sweetest wife, for having had this talk with thee--thou wilt
bless my sleep. I wish that thou couldst receive this letter to-night,
because I am sure thou needest it.

Let me know, mine ownest, what time thou intendest to go to Salem; and
if it be possible, I will come to the Depot to see thee. But do not
expect me too fervently, because there are many chances that it will
not be in my power. What a time this has been for my Dove and me!
Never, since we were married, have the fates been so perverse. And
now farewell, my dearest, dearest wife, on whom I repose, in whom I am
blest--whom I love with all the heart that is in me, and will love
more and more forever, as I grow more worthy to love thee. Be happy,
dearest; for my happiness must come through thee.

God bless thee, and let me feel his blessing through thy heart.

     Thy lovingest husband--

     DE L'AUBEPINE.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, May 19th, 1840

     _My dearest_,

Where in the world art thou?--or hast thou flown away to Paradise,
naughtiest Dove, without bidding thy husband farewell? I know not
whereabout this letter will find thee; but I throw it upon the winds
in the confidence that some breeze of Heaven will bear it to thee; for
I suppose heart never spoke to heart, without being heard, and sooner
or later finding a response. Perhaps some hearts that speak to other
hearts here on earth may find no response till they have passed far
into Eternity; but our hearts catch each other's whispers even here.
Happy we! But, belovedest, how is it that thou hast sent me no token
of thy existence, since we parted on the Hoopers' doorstep, when thou
didst press my hand without a word? It seems an age since then. Thou
saidst, on Sunday, that thou shouldst probably return to Salem to-day;
but surely thou hast not gone. I feel lonely and not cheerful--my
spirit knows not whereabout to seek thee, and so it shivers as if
there were no _Thou_ at all--as if my Dove had been only a dream and a
vision, and now had vanished into unreality and nothingness.

But tomorrow I shall surely hear from thee: and even should it be
otherwise, I shall yet know, with everlasting faith, that my Dove's
heart has been trying to make me sensible of its embraces all this
time. My dearest, was not that a sweet time--that Sabbath afternoon
and eve? But why didst thou look up in my face, as we walked, and ask
why I was so grave? If I was grave I know no cause for it, beloved.
Lights and shadows are continually flitting across my inward sky, and
I know neither whence they come nor whither they go; nor do I inquire
too closely into them. It is dangerous to look too minutely at such
phenomena. It is apt to create a substance, where at first there was a
mere shadow. If at any time, dearest wife, there should seem--though
to me there never does--but if there should ever seem to be an
expression unintelligible from one of our souls to another, we will
not strive to interpret it into earthly language, but wait for the
soul to make itself understood; and were we to wait a thousand years,
we need deem it no more time than we can spare. I speak only in
reference to such dim and intangible matters as that which suggested
this passage of my letter. It is not that I have any love for mystery;
but because I abhor it--and because I have felt, a thousand times,
that words may be a thick and darksome veil of mystery between the
soul and the truth which it seeks. Wretched were we, indeed, if we had
no better means of communicating ourselves, no fairer garb in which to
array our essential selves, than these poor rags and tatters of Babel.
Yet words are not without their use, even for purposes of
explanation,--but merely for explaining outward acts, and all sorts of
external things, leaving the soul's life and action to explain itself
in its own way.

My belovedest, what a misty disquisition have I scribbled! I would not
read it over for sixpence. Think not that I supposed it necessary to
sermonize thee so; but the sermon created itself from sentence to
sentence; and being written, thou knowest that it belongs to thee, and
I have no right to keep it back. Dearest, I was up very early this
morning, and have had a good deal to do, especially this afternoon.
Let me plead this excuse for my dulness and mistiness. I suspect that,
hereafter, my little Dove will know how to estimate the difficulty of
pouring one's self out in a soul-written letter, amid the
distractions of business and society--she herself having experienced
these checks upon her outpourings.

Now good bye, mine ownest wife. God bless us both--or may God bless
either of us, and that one will bless the other. Dost thou sleep well
now-a-nights, belovedest? Of whom dost thou dream? Thy husband's long
days and short nights hardly leave him time to dream.

     THINE OWNEST.

Dearest, just as I was folding this letter, came thy note. Do thou be
at the Depot as soon as possible after eleven; and I will move Heaven
and earth to meet thee there. Perhaps a little before eleven.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     South Street.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, May 29th, 1840.--6 P.M.

     _My dearest_,

Rejoice with thy husband, for he is free from a load of coal, which
has been pressing upon his shoulders throughout all this hot weather.
I am convinced that Christian's burthen consisted of coal; and no
wonder he felt so much relieved when it fell off and rolled into the
sepulchre. His load, however, at the utmost, could not have been more
than a few bushels; whereas mine was exactly one hundred and
thirty-five chaldrons and seven tubs.... Oh, my dearest, I feel the
stroke upon mine own head. Except through thee, I can never feel any
torment of that nature; for all these burning suns have blazed upon my
head, unprotected except by a black hat, and yet I have felt no more
inconvenience than if I had been sitting in the pleasant gloom of a
dewy grot. Belovedest, be a great deal more careful of thyself.
Remember always that thou art not thine own, but that Providence has
entrusted to thy keeping a most delicate physical frame, which belongs
wholly to me, and which therefore thou must keep with infinitely more
care than thou wouldst the most precious jewel. And yet, I would not
have thee anxious and watchful like an invalid; but thou shouldst
consider that thou wert created to dwell nowhere but in the clime of
Paradise, and wast only placed upon this earth, because thy husband is
here and cannot do without thee--and that east-winds and fierce suns
are evil unknown in thy native region, and therefore thy frame was not
so constructed as to resist them; wherefore thine own wise precautions
must be thy safeguard. Blessedest, I kiss thy brow,--at least, I kiss
the air thrice; and if none of the three kisses reach thee, then three
very precious things will have gone forth from my heart in vain. But
if any of thy headache and bewilderment have remained hitherto, and
now thou feelest somewhat like a breath of Heaven on thy brow, we will
take it for granted that my kisses have found thee out. Good bye now,
dearest wife; for I am weary and stupid; and as I need not be at the
Custom-House before eight or nine o'clock tomorrow, thou shalt have
the rest of the letter freshly written in the morning.

Now it will be lucky for thee if thou gettest the last page of this
letter entirely full. Dearest, thy last letter had the fragrance of a
bank of violets--yea, all sorts of sweet smelling flowers and perfumed
shrubs. I can lie down and repose upon it, as upon a bed of roses. It
rejoices me to think that my whole being is not enveloped with
coal-dust, but that its better half is breathing the breath of
flowers. Oh, do be very happy, mine ownest wife, and fill thyself with
all gentle pleasures that lie within thy reach; because at present
thou hast a double duty to perform in this respect; since, so far as
my enjoyments depend on external things, I can contribute nothing to
the common stock of happiness. And yet dearest, nothing that I ever
enjoyed before can come into the remotest comparison with my continual
enjoyment of thy love--with the deep, satisfied repose which that
consciousness brings to me; a repose subsisting, and ever to subsist,
in the midst of all anxieties, troubles and agitations.

Belovedest, I sometimes wish that thou couldst be with [me] on board
my salt-vessels and colliers; because there are many things of which
thou mightst make such pretty descriptions; and in future years, when
thy husband is again busy at the loom of fiction, he would weave in
these little pictures. My fancy is rendered so torpid by my ungenial
way of life, that I cannot sketch off the scenes and portraits that
interest me; and I am forced to trust them to my memory, with the hope
of recalling them at some more favorable period. For three or four
days past, I have been observing a little Mediterranean boy, from
Malaga, not more than ten or eleven years old, but who is already a
citizen of the world, and seems to be just as gay and contented on the
deck of a Yankee coal-vessel, as he could be while playing beside his
mother's door. It is really touching to see how free and happy he
is--how the little fellow takes this whole wide world for his home,
and all mankind for his family. He talks Spanish--at least, that is
his native tongue; but he is also very intelligible in English, and
perhaps he likewise has smatterings of the speech of other countries,
whither the winds may have wafted this little sea-bird. He is a
Catholic; and yesterday, being Friday, he caught some fish and fried
them for his dinner, in sweet oil; and really they looked so delicate
that I almost wished he would invite me to partake. Every once in a
while, he undresses himself and leaps overboard, plunging down beneath
the waves, as if the sea were as native to him as the earth; then he
runs up the rigging of the vessel, as if he meant to fly away through
the air. Do thou remember this little boy, dearest, and tell me of
him one of these days; and perhaps I may make something more beautiful
of him than thou wouldst think from these rough and imperfect touches.

Belovedest, is thy head quite well? Art thou very beautiful now? Dost
thou love me infinitely?

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, June 2d, 1840--Before Breakfast

     _My dearest_,

Thy Friday's letter came in due season to the Custom-House; but
Colonel Hall could not find time to bring it to the remote region of
the earth, where I was then an exile; so that it awaited me till the
next morning. At noon, came thy next letter, at an interval of several
hours from the receipt of the former--a space quite long enough to be
interposed between thy missives. And yesterday arrived thy letter of
the Sabbath--and all three are very precious to thy husband; and the
oftener they come the more he needs them. Now I must go down to
breakfast. Dost thou not wonder at finding me scribbling between seven
and eight o'clock in the morning? I do believe, naughtiest, that thou
hast been praying for the non-arrival of salt and coal--not
considering that, if thy petitions are heard, the poor Measurers will
not earn a sixpence.

Belovedest, I know not what counsel to give thee about calling on my
sisters; and therefore must leave the matter to thine own exquisite
sense of what is right and delicate. We will talk it over at an early
opportunity. I think I can partly understand why they appear cool
towards thee; but it is for nothing in thyself personally, nor for any
unkindness towards my Dove, whom everybody must feel to be the
loveablest being in the world. But there are some untoward
circumstances. Nevertheless, I have faith that all will be well, and
that they will receive Sophie Hawthorne and the Dove into their heart
of hearts; so let us wait patiently on Providence, as we always have,
and see what time will bring forth. And, my dearest, whenever thou
feelest disquieted about things of this sort--if ever that be the
case--do thou speak freely to thy husband; for these are matters in
which words may be of use, because they concern the relations between
ourselves and others. Now, good bye, belovedest, till night. I
perceive that the sun is shining dimly; but I fear that there is still
an east wind to keep my Dove in her dove-cote.

Towards night--Ownest wife, the day has been spent without much
pleasure or profit--a part of the time at the Custom-House, waiting
there for the chance of work,--partly at the Athenaeum, and partly
at a bookstore, looking for something suitable for our library. Among
other recent purchases, I have bought a very good edition of Milton
(his poetry) in two octavo volumes; and I saw a huge new London volume
of his prose works, but it seemed to me that there was but a small
portion of it that thou and I should ever care about reading--so I
left it on the shelf. Dearest, I have bought some lithographic prints
at auction, which I mean to send thee, that thou mayst show them to
thy husband, the next afternoon that thou permittest him to spend with
thee. Thou art not to expect anything very splendid; for I did not
enter the auction-room till a large part of the collection was sold;
so that my choice was limited. Perhaps there are one or two not
altogether unworthy to be put on the walls of our sanctuary; but this
I leave to thy finer judgment. I would thou couldst peep into my room
and see thine own pictures, from which I have removed the black veils;
and there is no telling how much brighter and cheerfuller the parlor
looks now, whenever I enter it.

Belovedest, I love thee very especially much today. But then that
naughty Sophie Hawthorne--it would be out of the question to treat her
with tenderness. Nothing shall she get from me, at my next visit,
save a kiss upon her nose; and I should not wonder it she were to
return the favor with a buffet upon my ear. Mine own Dove, how unhappy
art thou to be linked with such a mate!--to be bound up in the same
volume with her!--and me unhappy, too, to be forced to keep such a
turbulent little rebel in my inmost heart! Dost thou not think she
might be persuaded to withdraw herself, quietly, and take up her
residence somewhere else? Oh, what an idea! It makes my heart close
its valves and embrace her the more closely.

Well, dearest, it is breakfast time, and thy husband hath an appetite.
What dost thou eat for breakfast?--but I know well enough that thou
never eatest anything but bread and milk and chickens. Dost thou love
pigeons in a pie? I am fonder of Dove than anything else--it is my
heart's food and sole sustenance. God bless us.

     THINE OWN HUSBAND.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, June 11th, 1840--5 or 6 P.M.

     _My blessedest_,

Thou hast strayed quite out of the sphere of my imagination, and I
know not how to represent thy whereabout, any more than if thou hadst
gone on pilgrimage beyond the sea, or to the moon. Dost thou still
love me, in all thy wanderings? Are there any east-winds there? Truly,
now that thou hast escaped beyond its jurisdiction, I could wish that
the east wind would blow every day, from ten o'clock till five; for
there is great refreshment in it for us poor mortals that toil beneath
the sun. Dearest, thou must not think too unkindly even of the
east-wind. It is not, perhaps, a wind to be loved, even in its
benignest moods; but there are seasons when I delight to feel its
breath upon my cheek, though it be never advisable to throw open my
bosom and take it into my heart, as I would its gentle sisters of the
South and West. To-day, if I had been on the wharves, the slight
chill of an east wind would have been a blessing, like the chill of
death to a world-weary man. But, dearest, thou wilt rejoice to hear
that this has been one of the very idlest days that I ever spent in
Boston. Oh, hadst thou been here! In the morning, soon after
breakfast, I went to the Athenaeum Gallery; and during the hour or two
that I stayed, not a single visitor came in. Some people were putting
up paintings in one division of the room; but we might have had the
other all to ourselves--thy husband had it all to himself--or rather,
he did not have it, nor possess it in fulness and reality, because
thou wast not there. I cannot see pictures without thee; so thou must
not expect me to criticise this exhibition. There are two pictures
there by our friend (thy friend--and is it not the same thing?) Sarah
Clark--scenes in Kentucky. Doubtless I shall find them very admirable,
when we have looked at them together. The gallery of sculpture I shall
not visit, unless I can be there with thee.

From the picture gallery I went to the reading-room of the Athenaeum,
and there read the magazines till nearly twelve--thence to the
Custom-House, and soon afterwards to dinner with Colonel Hall--then
back to the Custom-House, but only for a little while. There was
nothing in the world to do, and so, at two o'clock, I came home and
lay down on the bed, with the Faery Queen in my hand, and my Dove in
my heart. Soon a pleasant slumber came over me; it was not a deep,
sound sleep, but a slumbrous withdrawing of myself from the external
world. Whether thou camest to me in a dream, I cannot tell; but thou
didst peep at me through all the interstices of sleep. After I awoke,
I did not take up the Faery Queen again, but lay thinking of thee, and
at last bestirred myself and got up to write this letter. My
belovedest wife, does it not make thee happy to think that thy husband
has escaped, for one whole summer day, from his burthen of salt and
coal, and has been almost as idle as ever his idle nature could
desire?--and this, too, on one of the longest days of all the year!
Oh, could I have spent it in some shady nook, with mine own wife! Now
good-bye, blessedest. So indolent is thy husband, that he intends now
to relieve himself even from the sweet toil of shaping his thoughts of
thee into written words; moreover, there is no present need of it,
because I am not to be at the Custom-House very early, and can finish
this letter tomorrow morning. Good-bye, dearest, and keep a quiet
heart.

June 12th. Â½ past 7 A.M.--Belovedest, art thou not going to be very
happy to-day? I hope so, and believe so; and, dearest, if thou findest
thyself comfortable at Concord--and if the Emersonians love thee and
admire thee as they ought--do not thou too stubbornly refuse to stay a
week longer than the term first assigned.

(Remainder of letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, June 22d, (Monday) Â½ past 4 [1840]

Ownest, Colonel Hall put thy letter into my hand at our eating-house,
so that its reception was timed very like that of mine to thee; but
thy husband cared not for ceremony, nor for the presence of fifty
people, but straightway broke the "long-legged little fowl" asunder
and began to read. Belovedest, what a letter! Never was so much beauty
poured out of any heart before; and to read it over and over is like
bathing my brow in a fresh fountain, and drinking draughts that renew
the life within me. Nature is kind and motherly to thee, and taketh
thee into her inmost heart and cherisheth thee there, because thou
lookest on her with holy and loving eyes. My dearest, how canst thou
say that I have ever written anything beautiful, being thyself so
potent to reproduce whatever is loveliest? If I did not know that thou
lovest me, I should even be ashamed before thee. Sweetest wife, it
gladdens me likewise that thou meetest with such sympathy there, and
that thy friends have faith that thy husband is worthy of thee,
because they see that thy wise heart could not have gone astray.
Worthy of thee I am not; but thou wilt make me so; for there will be
time, or eternity enough, for thy blessed influence to work upon me.
Would that we could build our cottage this very now, this very summer,
amid the scenes which thou describest. My heart thirsts and languishes
to be there, away from the hot sun and the coal-dust and the steaming
docks, and the thick-pated, stubborn, contentious men, with whom I
brawl from morning till night, and all the weary toil which quite
engrosses me, and yet occupies only a part of my being which I did not
know existed before I became a Measurer. I do think that I should sink
down quite disheartened and inanimate if thou wert not happy, and
gathering from earth and sky enjoyment for both of us; but this makes
me feel that my real, innermost soul is apart from all these unlovely
circumstances,--and that it has not ceased to exist, as I might
sometimes suspect, but is nourished and kept alive through thee.
Belovedest, if thou findest it good to be there, why wilt thou not
stay even a little longer than this week? Thou knowest not what
comfort I have in thinking of thee and those beautiful scenes; where
the east wind cometh not, and amid those sympathizing hearts, which
perhaps thou wilt not find elsewhere--at least not everywhere. I feel
as if thou hadst found a haven of peace and rest, where I can trust
thee without disquiet, and feel that thou art safe. It thou art well
and happy, if thy cheek is becoming rosier, if thy step is light and
joyous there, and if thy heart makes pleasant music, then is it not
better for thee to stay a little longer? And if better for thee, it is
so for thy husband likewise. Now, ownest wife, I do not press thee to
stay, but leave it all to thy wisdom, and if thou feelest that it is
now time to come home, most gladly will he welcome thee.

Dearest, I meant to have written to thee yesterday afternoon, so that
thou shouldst have received the letter today, but Mrs. Hillard pressed
her husband and myself to take a walk into the country, because his
health needed such an excursion. So, after taking a nap, we set forth
over the western avenue--a dreary, treeless, fierce-sunshiny, irksome
road; but after journeying three or four or five miles, we came to
some of the loveliest rural scenery--yes, the very loveliest--that
ever I saw in my life. The first part of our road was like the life of
toil and weariness that I am now leading; the latter part was like
the life that we will lead hereafter. Would that I had thy pen, and I
would give thee pictures of beauty to match thine own; but I should
only mar my remembrance of them by the attempt. Not a beautiful scene
did I behold but I imaged thee in the midst of it--thou wast with me
in all the walk, and when I sighed it was for thee, and when I smiled
it was for thee, and when I trusted in future happiness, it was for
thee; and if I did not doubt and fear, it was altogether because of
thee. What else than happiness can God intend for thee?--and if thy
happiness, then mine also. On our return, we stopped at Braman's
baths, and plunged in, and washed away all stains of earth, and became
new creatures. Dearest, I sympathize with thee in thy love of the
bath, and conveniences for it must not be forgotten in our domestic
arrangements. Yet I am not entirely satisfied with any more contracted
bath than the illimitable ocean; and to plunge into it is the next
thing to soaring into the sky.

This morning I rose early to finish measuring a load of coal, which
being accomplished in the forenoon, and there being little prospect of
anything more to do, Colonel Hall, who perceived that thy husband's
energies were somewhat exhausted by the heat, and by much brawling
with the coal-people, did send me home immediately after dinner. So
then I took a nap, with a volume of Spenser in my hand, and awaking at
four, I re-re-reperused thy last letter, and sat down to pour myself
out to thee, and in so doing, dearest wife, I have had great comfort.
And now the afternoon is beautiful in its decline; but my feet are
somewhat afflicted with yesterday's excursion; so that I am in doubt
whether to go out again, although I should like a bath.

Belovedest, I must not forget to thank Mr. Emerson for his invitation
to Concord; but really it will not be in my power to accept it. Do
thou say this in the way it ought to be said, and let him know what a
business-machine thy husband is. Now, good-bye. Art thou very happy? I
trust so, dearest. Thou hast our whole treasure of happiness in thy
keeping. Keep it safe, ownest wife, and add to it continually. God
bless thee.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Rev. R. W. Emerson,
     Concord, Massachusetts.

(Forwarded, Salem).




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, July 10th, 1840--Morning

     _Belovedest_,

Doubtless thou didst expect a letter from me yesterday; but my days
have been so busy, and my evenings so invaded with visitants, that I
have not had a moment's time to talk with thee. Scarcely, till this
morning, have I been able to read thy letter quietly. Night before
last, came Mr. Jones Very; and thou knowest that he is somewhat
unconscionable as to the length of his calls. Yesterday I came home
early; and had the fates been propitious, thou shouldst have had a
long letter; but in the afternoon came Mr. Hillard's London brother,
and wasted my precious hours with a dull talk of nothing; and in the
evening I was sorely tried with Mr. Conolly, and a Cambridge
law-student, who came to do homage to thy husband's literary renown.
So my sweetest wife was put aside for these idle people. I do wish the
blockheads, and all other blockheads in this world, could comprehend
how inestimable are the quiet hours of a busy man--especially when
that man has no native impulse to keep him busy, but is continually
forced to battle with his own nature, which yearns for seclusion (the
solitude of a united two, my belovedest) and freedom to think, and
dream, and feel.

Well, dearest, thy husband is in perfect health this morning, and good
spirits; and much doth he rejoice that thou art so soon to be near
him. No tongue can tell--no pen can write what I feel. Belovedest, do
not thou make thyself sick in the bustle of removing; for I think that
there is nothing more trying, even to a robust frame and rugged
spirit, than the disturbance of such an occasion. Now, good-bye; for I
must hurry to the Custom-House to see Colonel Hall, who is going out
of town for two days, and will probably leave the administration of
our department in my hands.

God bless thee, belovedest;--and perhaps thou wilt receive another
letter before thy advent, but do not thou count upon it.

     Thine ownest Husband,
     DE L'AUBEPINE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., August 9th [1840]

     _Ownest Dove_,

I have almost forgotten how to write letters--not having put pen to
paper for that purpose (or any other, indeed) since my last to thee;
but I cannot help writing thee a few lines, now when I had hoped to be
listening to thy sweetest voice. Art thou much changed in this
intervening time? Is thy hair grown gray? Art thou an old woman?
Truly, it does appear very, very long to thy husband--an incomputable
period. Belovedest, I had been out this forenoon; and when I returned,
there was thy letter, lying on the threshold of my chamber-door. I had
a presage of calamity, as soon as I saw it. Had I known of this visit
of thine aunt, I would have taken the opportunity to go to Salem, and
so we would have had next Sunday to ourselves. Does thine aunt say
that thou lookest in magnificent health?--and that thou art very
beautiful? If she has not yet said so thou shouldst ask her opinion on
that point.

Belovedest, even if thine aunt Curtis should stay a week, do not
thou incommode thy mother and sisters by trying to arrange a meeting.
It is very painful to me to disturb and derange anybody in the world.

Thou dost not say whether thou art very well to-day--and whether thou
art light of heart. I beseech thee never to write me even the shortest
note, without giving me a glimpse of thyself in the very moment of
writing;--and yet, I leave it all to thee, and withdraw this last
petition. Thou knowest best what to write; for thou art an inspired
little penwoman.

Thy husband is to measure salt at the end of Long Wharf tomorrow, and
the next day, and probably the next, and the next. It is as desirable
a place and employment as a Measurer can expect; so let thy visions of
me be rather pleasurable than otherwise. I am in particularly good
health; but my heart hungers for thee--nevertheless, I mean to be
cheerful and content. Do thou be so likewise, little Dove--and naughty
Sophie Hawthorne too. Now, good-bye. This is a very empty letter--at
least, it would be so, if it had not an infinite love in it. God bless
thee.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     No. 13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St. August 24th, Â¼ past 6 P.M. [1840]

     _Own belovedest_,

I had a presentiment of a letter from thee this morning; and so was
not at all surprised when I saw thy father in the long, low, darksome
room where thy husband was in durance. But I had not the least
anticipation of the intelligence which thou didst send me; and it is
the harder to be borne, because--(do not be naughty, ownest Dove)--I
have an indispensable engagement at Cambridge tomorrow afternoon and
evening; whereby our meeting must be delayed yet another day. Dearest,
do set me a lofty example of patience. Be very good and very quiet,
and enjoy thy Aunt Curtis's society to the utmost, and press her to
stay with thee till Wednesday at six o'clock. But not an hour longer!
Thou must absolutely eject [her] with thine own tender little hands,
if she propose to tarry that night also.

Belovedest, I went to the Hurley Burley last evening; and considering
that it was the first time I had been there without thee since we
were married, I enjoyed it very well. We had a good deal of talk; but
I missed thy gentle voice, which is surely the sweetest sound that was
ever heard anywhere save in Paradise. Thy husband talked somewhat more
than is his wont, but said nothing that is at all worth repeating; and
I think he might as well have dispensed with saying anything. He shows
his wisdom and policy much more in his general silence than in his
occasional loquacity. Dearest, if I had not so high a respect for thy
judgment, I should pronounce thy husband but a tolerable person, at
best; but as thou hast been impelled to give thy precious self to such
a man, there must be more in him than ordinary eyes can perceive. Miss
Burley proposed to me to write an address of some kind for the
Bunker-Hill fair; but I manifested no readiness to comply--neither do
I feel any. Has my Dove contributed anything?

I went home in the midst of that beautiful rain, and sat up two hours
with Elizabeth and Louisa.

This has not been a toilsome day, my wife. Indeed, I have had nothing
to do; nor is it certain that I shall be employed tomorrow morning.
Quite unexpected is this lull amid the tempest of business. I left the
Custom-House at about four o'clock, and went to the bath, where I
spent half an hour very deliciously. Dearest, we must have all sorts
of bathing conveniences in our establishment. Thou art a water-spirit,
like Undine. And thy spirit is to mine a pure fountain, in which I
bathe my brow and heart; and immediately all the fever of the world
departs. Thou art--but I cannot quite get hold of the idea that I
meant to express; and as I want to leave a part of the page till
tomorrow morning, I will stop here. God bless thee. I think I shall
dream of thee to night, for I never loved thee so much.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     No. 13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St. Sept. 18th, 1840. 8 o'clock P.M.

     _Sweetest Dove_,

Thy father, apparently, did not see fit to carry thy letter to the
Custom-House; and yet I think my intuition informed me that a letter
was written; for I looked into the Desk very eagerly, although Colonel
Hall neither pointed with his finger nor glanced with his eye, as is
his custom when anything very precious is in store. It reached me here
in mine own tabernacle, about half an hour since, while I sat resting
myself from the toils of the day, thinking of thee, my Dove.

Thou didst make me happier, last evening, than I ever hoped to be,
save in Heaven--and still that same happiness is around me and within
me. I am the happier for everything thou dost and sayest--thou canst
not possibly act so that I will not love thee better and be the
happier for that very individual action.

Dearest, it was necessary that I should speak to thee to-night; but
thou must not look for such a golden letter as thou didst write this
morning; for thy husband is tolerably weary, and has very few thoughts
in his mind, though much love in his heart. I cannot do without thy
voice--thou knowest not what a sweet influence it has upon me, even
apart from the honied wisdom which thou utterest. It thou shouldst
talk in an unknown tongue, I should listen with infinite satisfaction,
and be much edified in spirit at least, if not in intellect. When thou
speakest to me, there is mingled with those earthly words, which are
mortal inventions, a far diviner language, which thy soul utters and
my soul understands.

Ownest Dove, I did not choose to go to Malden this evening, to hear
the political lecture which I told thee of; for, indeed, after toiling
all day, it is rather too hard to be bothered with such nonsense at
night. I have no desire to go anywhither, after sunset, save to see
mine own wife; and as to lectures, I love none but "curtain
lectures";--for such I suppose thine may be termed, although our
beloved so far hath no curtains. Dearest, when we live together, thou
wilt find me a most tediously stay-at-home husband. Thou wilt be
compelled to rebuke and objurgate me, in order to gain the privilege
of spending one or two evenings in a month by a solitary fireside.

Sweetest wife, I must bid thee farewell now, exhorting thee to be as
happy as the angels; for thou art as good and holy as they, and have
more merit in thy goodness than they have; because the angels have
always dwelt in sinless heaven; whereas thy pilgrimage has been on
earth, where many sin and go astray. I am ashamed of this letter;
there is nothing in it worthy of being offered to my Dove; but yet I
shall send it; for a letter to one's beloved wife ought not to be kept
back for any dimness of thought or feebleness of expression, any more
than a prayer should be stifled in the soul, because the tongue of man
cannot breathe it eloquently to the Deity. Love has its own
omniscience; and what Love speaks to Love is comprehended in the same
way that prayers are.

Ownest, dost thou not long very earnestly to see thy husband?
Well--thou shalt see him on Monday night; and this very night he will
come into thy dreams, if thou wilt admit him there.

     Thy very lovingest, and very sleepiest,
     HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Oct. 4th, 1840--Â½ past 10 A.M.

     _Mine ownest_,

Here sits thy husband in his old accustomed chamber, where he used to
sit in years gone by, before his soul became acquainted with thine.
Here I have written many tales--many that have been burned to
ashes--many that doubtless deserved the same fate. This deserves to be
called a haunted chamber, for thousands upon thousands of visions have
appeared to me in it; and some few of them have become visible to the
world. If ever I should have a biographer, he ought to make great
mention of this chamber in my memoirs, because so much of my lonely
youth was wasted here, and here my mind and character were formed; and
here I have been glad and hopeful, and here I have been despondent;
and here I sat a long, long time, waiting patiently for the world to
know me, and sometimes wondering why it did not know me sooner, or
whether it would ever know me at all--at least, till I were in my
grave. And sometimes (for I had no wife then to keep my heart warm) it
seemed as if I were already in the grave, with only life enough to be
chilled and benumbed. But oftener I was happy--at least, as happy as I
then knew how to be, or was aware of the possibility of being. By and
bye, the world found me out in my lonely chamber, and called me
forth--not, indeed, with a loud roar of acclamation, but rather with a
still, small voice; and forth I went, but found nothing in the world
that I thought preferable to my old solitude, till at length a certain
Dove was revealed to me, in the shadow of a seclusion as deep as my
own had been. And I drew nearer and nearer to the Dove, and opened my
bosom to her, and she flitted into it, and closed her wings there--and
there she nestles now and forever, keeping my heart warm, and renewing
my life with her own. So now I begin to understand why I was
imprisoned so many years in this lonely chamber, and why I could never
break through the viewless bolts and bars; for if I had sooner made my
escape into the world, I should have grown hard and rough, and been
covered with earthly dust, and my heart would have become callous by
rude encounters with the multitude; so that I should have been all
unfit to shelter a heavenly Dove in my arms. But living in solitude
till the fulness of time was come, I still kept the dew of my youth
and the freshness of my heart, and had these to offer to my Dove.

Well, dearest, I had no notion what I was going to write, when I
began, and indeed I doubted whether I should write anything at all;
for after such communion as that of our last blissful evening, it
seems as if a sheet of paper could only be a veil betwixt us. Ownest,
in the times that I have been speaking of, I used to think that I
could imagine all passions, all feelings, all states of the heart and
mind; but how little did I know what it is to be mingled with
another's being! Thou only hast taught me that I have a heart--thou
only hast thrown a light deep downward, and upward, into my soul. Thou
only hast revealed me to myself; for without thy aid, my best
knowledge of myself would have been merely to know my own shadow--to
watch it flickering on the wall, and mistake its fantasies for my own
real actions. Indeed, we are but shadows--we are not endowed with real
life, and all that seems most real about us is but the thinnest
substance of a dream--till the heart is touched. That touch creates
us--then we begin to be--thereby we are beings of reality, and
inheritors of eternity. Now, dearest, dost thou comprehend what thou
hast done for me? And is it not a somewhat fearful thought, that a few
slight circumstances might have prevented us from meeting, and then I
should have returned to my solitude, sooner or later (probably now,
when I have thrown down my burthen of coal and salt) and never should
[have] been created at all! But this is an idle speculation. If the
whole world had stood between us, we must have met--if we had been
born in different ages, we could not have been sundered.

Belovedest, how dost thou do? If I mistake not, it was a southern rain
yesterday, and, next to the sunshine of Paradise, _that_ seems to be
thy element.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Novr. 27th, Friday [1840]

     _Dearest Wife_,

Never was a wife so yearned for as thou art. I wonder how I could have
resolved to be absent from thee so long--it is far too long a time to
be wasted in a suspension of life. My heart is sometimes faint for
want of thee--and sometimes it is violent and tumultuous for the same
cause. How is it with thine, mine ownest? Dost thou not feel, when
thou goest to bed, that the day is utterly incomplete?--that it has
been an unsatisfactory dream, wherein the soul groped wearily for
something that it could not obtain? Thus it is with thy husband.

What a history wilt thou have to tell me, when I come back! We shall
be a week in getting through it. Poor little Dove, I pity thee now:
for I apprehend that, by this time, thou hast got thy husband's
dullest of all books to read. And how many pages canst thou read,
without falling asleep? Well is it for thee, that thou hast adopted
the practice of extending thyself on the sopha, while at thy studies;
for now I need be under no apprehension of thy sinking out of a chair.
I would, for thy sake, that thou couldst find anything laudable in
this awful little volume; because thou wouldst like to tell thy
husband that he has done well.

Oh, this weather!--how dismal it is. A sullen sky above, and mud and
"slosh" below! Thy husband needs thy sunshine, thou cheerfullest
little wife; for he is quite pervaded and imbued with the sullenness
of all nature. Thou knowest that his disposition is never the most
gracious in the world; but now he is absolutely intolerable. The days
should be all sunshine when he is away from thee; because, if there
were twenty suns in the unclouded sky, yet his most essential sunshine
would be wanting. Well, there is one good in absence; it makes me
realise more adequately how much I love thee--and what an infinite
portion of me thou art. It makes me happy even to yearn and sigh for
thee as I do; because I love to be conscious of our deep, indissoluble
union--and of the impossibility of living without thee. There is
something good in me, else thou couldst not have become one with me,
thou holy wife. I shall be happy, because God has made my happiness
necessary to that of one whom He loves. Thus is it that I reason with
myself; and therefore my soul rejoices to feel the intermingling of
our beings, even when it is felt in this longing desire for thee.

Dearest, amongst my other reasons for wishing to be in Boston, wouldst
thou believe that I am eager to behold thy alabaster vase--and the
little flower-vase, and thy two precious pictures? Even so it is.
Thou, who art the loadstone of my soul, hast magnetised them,
therefore they attract me.

I met Frederic Howes last evening, and promised to go there to-night;
although he seemed to think that Miss Burley will be in Boston.
Perhaps thou wilt see her there. I wonder if she will not come and
settle with us in Mr. Ripley's Utopia. And this reminds me to ask
whether thou hast drawn those caricatures--especially the one of thy
husband, staggering, and puffing, and toiling onward to the gate of
the farm, burthened with the unsaleable remnant of Grandfather's
Chair. Dear me, what a ponderous, leaden load it will be!

Dearest, I am utterly ashamed of my handwriting. I wonder how thou
canst anywise tolerate what is so ungraceful, being thyself all grace.
But I think I seldom write so shamefully as in this epistle. It is a
toil and torment to write upon this sheet of paper; for it seems to be
greasy, and feels very unpleasantly to the pen. Moreover the pen
itself is very culpable. Yet thou wouldst make the fairest, delicatest
strokes upon the same paper, with the same pen. Thou art beautiful
throughout, even to the minutest thing.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Jany. 12th, 1841

Infinitely dearest, I went to the post office yesterday, after dinner,
and inquiring for a letter, thy "visible silence" was put into my
hands. Canst thou remotely imagine how glad I was? Hast thou also been
gladdened by an uncouth scribbling, which thy husband dispatched to
thee on Monday? Oh, belovedest, no words can tell how thirsty my
spirit is for thine! Surely I was very reprehensible to conceive the
idea of spending a whole week and more away from thee. Why didst thou
not scold me? and go with me wherever I went? Without thee, I have but
the semblance of life. All the world hereabouts seems dull and
drowsy--a vision, but without any spirituality--and I, likewise an
unspiritual shadow, struggle vainly to catch hold of something real.
Thou art my reality; and nothing else is real for me, unless thou give
it that golden quality by thy touch.

Dearest, how camest thou by the headache? Thou shouldst have dreamed
of thy husband's breast, instead of that Arabian execution; and then
thou wouldst have awaked with a very delicious thrill in thy heart,
and no pain in thy head. And what wilt thou do to-day, persecuted
little Dove, when thy abiding-place will be a Babel of talkers? Would
that Miss Margaret Fuller might lose her tongue!--or my Dove her ears,
and so be left wholly to her husband's golden silence! Dearest wife, I
truly think that we could dispense with audible speech, and yet never
feel the want of an interpreter between our spirits. We have soared
into a region where we talk together in a language that can have no
earthly echo. Articulate words are a harsh clamor and dissonance. When
man arrives at his highest perfection, he will again be dumb!--for I
suppose he was dumb at the Creation, and must perform an entire circle
in order to return to that blessed state. Cousin Christopher, by thy
account, seems to be of the same opinion, and is gradually learning to
talk without the use of his voice.

Jany. 15th. Friday.--Oh, belovedest, what a weary week is this! Never
did I experience the like. I went to bed last night, positively dismal
and comfortless. Wilt thou know thy husband's face, when we meet
again? Art thou much changed by the flight of years, my poor little
wife? Is thy hair turned gray? Dost thou wear a day-cap, as well as
a night cap? How long since didst thou begin to use spectacles?
Perhaps thou wilt not like to have me see thee, now that Time has done
his worst to mar thy beauty; but fear thou not, sweetest Dove, for
what I have loved and admired in thee is eternal. I shall look through
the envious mist of age, and discern thy immortal grace as perfectly
as in the light of Paradise. As for thy husband, he is grown quite
bald and gray, and has very deep wrinkles across his brow, and
crowsfeet and furrows all over his face. His eyesight fails him, so
that he can only read the largest print in the broadest day-light; but
it is a singular circumstance, that he makes out to decypher the pygmy
characters of thy epistles, even by the faintest twilight. The secret
is, that they are characters of light to him, so that he could
doubtless read them in midnight darkness. Art thou not glad,
belovedest, that thou wast ordained to be a heavenly light to thy
husband, amid the dreary twilight of age?

Grandfather is very anxious to know what has become of his chair, and
the Famous Old People who sat in it. I tell him that it will probably
arrive in the course of to-day; and that he need not be so impatient;
for the public will be very well content to wait, even were it till
Doomsday. He acquiesces, but scolds, nevertheless.

I saw thy cousin Mary Tappan yesterday, and felt the better for it,
because she is connected with thee in my mind. Dearest, I love thee
very much!!!! Art thou not astonished? I wish to ask thee a question,
but will reserve it for the extreme end of this letter.

I trust that thou art quite well, belovedest. That headache took a
very unfair advantage, in attacking thee while thou wast away from thy
husband. It is his province to guard thee both from head-ache and
heart-ache; and thou performest the same blessed office for him, so
far as regards the heart-ache--as to the head-ache, he knows it not,
probably because his head is like a block of wood.

Now good-bye, dearest, sweetest, loveliest, holiest, truest,
suitablest little wife. I worship thee. Thou art my type of womanly
perfection. Thou keepest my heart pure, and elevatest me above the
world. Thou enablest me to interpret the riddle of life, and fillest
me with faith in the unseen and better land, because thou leadest me
thither continually. God bless thee forever.

Dost thou love me?

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Jany. 27th, 1841--Â½ past 2 P.M.

Very dearest, what a dismal sky is this that hangs over us! Thy
husband doth but half live to-day--his soul lies asleep, or rather
torpid. As for thee, thou hast been prating at a great rate, and has
spoken many wonderful truths in to-day's conversation.

Belovedest, thou wast very sweet and lovely in our walk yesterday
morning; and it gladdens me much that Providence brought us together.
Dost thou not think that there is always some especial blessing
granted us, when we are to be divided for any length of time? Thou
rememberest what a blissful evening came down from Heaven to us,
before our last separation; insomuch that our hearts glowed with its
influence, all through the ensuing week. And yesterday there came a
heavenly morning, and thou camest with it like a rosy vision, which
still lingers with me, and will not quite fade away, till it be time
for it to brighten into reality. Surely, thou art beloved of Heaven,
and all these blessings are vouchsafed for thy sake; for I do not
remember that such things used to happen to me, while I was a solitary
sinner. Thou bringest a rich portion to thy husband, dearest--even the
blessing of thy Heavenly Father.

Whenever I return to Salem, I feel how dark my life would be, without
the light that thou shedst upon it--how cold, without the warmth of
thy love. Sitting in this chamber, where my youth wasted itself in
vain, I can partly estimate the change that has been wrought. It seems
as it the better part of me had been born, since then. I had walked
those many years in darkness, and might so have walked through life,
with only a dreamy notion that there was any light in the universe, if
thou hadst not kissed mine eye-lids, and given me to see. Thou,
belovedest, hast always been positively happy. Not so thy husband--he
has only been not miserable. Then which of us has gained the most? Thy
husband, assuredly.

When a beam of heavenly sunshine incorporates itself with a dark
cloud, is not the cloud benefitted more than the sunshine? What a
happy image is this!--my soul is the cloud, and thine the
sunshine--but a gentler, sweeter sunshine than ever melted into any
other cloud.

Dearest wife, nothing at all has happened to me, since I left thee. It
puzzles me to conceive how thou meetest with so many more events than
thy husband. Thou wilt have a volume to tell me, when we meet, and
wilt pour thy beloved voice into mine ears, in a stream of two hours'
long. At length thou wilt pause, and say--"But what has _thy_ life
been?"--and then will thy stupid husband look back upon what he calls
his life, for three or four days past, and behold a blank! Thou livest
ten times as much [as] he; because thy spirit takes so much more note
of things.

I met our friend Mr. Howes in the street, yesterday, and held a brief
confabulation. He did not inquire how my wife's health is. Was not
this a sin against etiquette? Dearest, thy husband's stupid book seems
to meet more approbation here, than the former volume did--though
_that_ was greeted more favorably than it deserved. There is a
superfluity of newspaper puffs here, and a deficiency in Boston, where
they are much needed. I ought to love Salem better than I do; for the
people have always had a pretty generous faith in me, ever since they
knew me at all. I fear I must be undeserving of their praise, else I
should never get it. What an ungrateful blockhead thy husband is!

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., 12 o'clock A.M. Monday [1841]

     _Truest Heart_,

I cannot come to thee this evening, because my friend Bridge is in
town, whom I hardly have seen for years past. Alas! I know not whether
I am a very faithful friend to him; for I cannot rejoice that he is
here, since it will keep me from my Dove. Thou art my only
reality--all other people are but shadows to me: all events and
actions, in which thou dost not mingle, are but dreams.

Do thou be good, dearest love, and when I come, tomorrow night, let me
find thee magnificent. Thou didst make me very happy, yesterday
forenoon--thou wast a south-west wind--or the sweetest and wholesomest
wind that blows, whichever it may be. I love thee more than I can
estimate; and last night I dreamed of thee. I know not exactly what;
but we were happy.

     God bless thee.

     Thine ownest husband,

     THEODORE DE L'AUBEPINE.

     A Madame,
     Madame Sophie Amelie de L'Aubepine,
     Rue d'Ouest,
     a Boston.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., March 12th,--Sunday [1841]

     _My Life_,

I have come back to thee! Thy heart gives thee no warning of my
presence; yet I am here--embracing thee with all the might of my soul.
Ah, forgetful Dove! How is it that thou hast had no spiritual
intelligence of my advent? I am sure that if yearnings and strivings
could have brought my spirit into communion with thine, thou wouldst
have felt me within thy bosom.

Thou truest-Heart, thou art conscious of me, as much as a heavenly
spirit can be, though the veil of mortality. Thou has not forgotten me
for a moment. I have felt thee drawing me towards thee, when I was
hundreds of miles away. The farther I went, the more was I conscious
of both our loves. I cannot write how much I love thee, and what
deepest trust I have in thee.

Dearest, expect me at six o'clock this afternoon. I have not the
watch, as thou knowest, and so it may be a few moments before or
after six. Oh, I need thee this very, very moment--my heart throbs,
and so does my hand, as thou mayst see by this scribble. God bless
thee! I am very well.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, March 18th, 1841

Dearest wife, here is thy poor husband, enduring his banishment as
best he may. Methinks all enormous sinners should be sent on
pilgrimage to Salem, and compelled to spend a length of time there,
proportioned to the enormity of their offenses. Such a punishment
would be suited to sinners that do not quite deserve hanging, yet are
too aggravated for the States-Prison. Oh, thy naughty husband! If it
be a punishment, he well deserves to suffer a life-long infliction of
it, were it only for slandering his native town so vilely. Thou must
scold him well. But, belovedest, any place is strange and irksome to
me, where thou art not; and where thou art, any place will be home.
Here I have made a great blot, as thou seest; but, sweetest, there is,
at this moment, a portrait of myself in the mirror of that inkspot. Is
not that queer to think of? When it reaches thee, it will be nothing
but a dull black spot; but now, when I bend over it, there I see
myself, as at the bottom of a pool. Thou must not kiss the blot, for
the sake of the image which it now reflects; though, if thou shouldst,
it will be a talisman to call me back thither again.

Thy husband writes thee nonsense, as his custom is. I wonder how thou
managest to retain any respect for him. Trust me, he is not worthy of
thee--not worthy to kiss the sole of thy shoe. For the future, thou
perfectest Dove, let thy greatest condescension towards him, be merely
an extension of the tip of thy forefinger, or of thy delicate little
foot in its stocking. Nor let him dare to touch it without
kneeling--which he will be very ready to do, because he devoutly
worships thee; which is the only thing that can be said in his favor.
But, think of his arrogance! At this very moment.--

March 19th. Forenoon.--Dearest soul, thou hast irrecoverably lost the
conclusion of this sentence; for I was interrupted by a visitor, and
have now forgotten what I meant to say. No matter; thou wilt not care
for the loss; for, now I think of it, if does not please thee to hear
thy husband spoken slightingly of. Well, then thou shouldst not have
married such a vulnerable person. But, to thy comfort be it said, some
people have a much more exalted opinion of him than I have. The Rev.
Mr. Gannet delivered a lecture at the Lyceum here, the other evening,
in which he introduced an enormous eulogium on whom dost thou think?
Why, on thy respectable husband! Thereupon all the audience gave a
loud hiss. Now is my mild little Dove exceedingly enraged, and will
plot some mischief and all-involving calamity against the Salem
people. Well, belovedest, they did not actually hiss at the praises
bestowed on thy husband--the more fools they!

Ownest wife, what dost thou think I received, just before I
re-commenced this scribble? Thy letter! Dearest, I felt as thou didst
about our meeting, at Mrs. Hillard's. It is an inexpressible torment.
Thy letter is very sweet and beautiful--an expression of thyself. But
I do trust thou hast given Mr. Ripley a downright scolding for
doubting either my will or ability to work. He ought to be ashamed of
himself, to try to take away the good name of a laboring man, who must
earn his bread (and thy bread too) by the sweat of his brow.

Sweetest, I have some business up in town; and so must close this
letter--which has been written in a great hurry, and is not fit to be
sent thee. Say what thou wilt, thy husband is not a good
letter-writer; he never writes, unless compelled by an internal or
external necessity; and most glad would he be to think that there
would never, henceforth, be occasion for his addressing a letter to
thee. For would not that imply that thou wouldst always hereafter be
close to his bosom?

Dearest love, expect me Monday evening. Didst thou expect me sooner?
It may not be; but if longing desires could bear me to thee, thou
wouldst straightway behold my shape in the great easy chair. God bless
thee, thou sinless Eve--thou dearest, sweetest, purest, perfectest
wife.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     Pinckney St., April 4th, [1841]

     _Very dearest-est_,

I have hitherto delayed to send these stories, because Howes'
Masquerade was destroyed by the printers: and I have been in hopes to
procure it elsewhere. But my own copy of the Magazine, in Salem, is
likewise lost; so that I must buy the Boston Book and request Mary's
acceptance of it.

Belovedest, how dost thou do this morning? I am very well; and surely
Heaven is one with earth, this beautiful day. I met Miss Burley in the
street, yesterday, and her face seemed actually to beam and radiate
with kindness and goodness; insomuch that my own face involuntarily
brightens, whenever I think of her. I thought she looked really
beautiful.

Oh, dearest, how I wish to see thee! I would thou hadst my miniature
to wear in thy bosom; and then I should feel sure that now and then
thou wouldst think of me--of which now, thou art aware, there can be
no certainty. Sweetest, I feel that I shall need great comfort from
thee, when the time of my journey to the far wilderness actually
comes. But we will be hopeful--thou shalt fill thy husband with thy
hopefulness, and so his toil shall seem light, and he shall sing
(though I fear it would be a most unlovely sort of screech) as he
drives the plough.

Now, belovedest, good-bye. My visit to Salem will be so brief, that a
letter would hardly reach thee, before I myself shall return; so it
will not be best for me to write. God bless thee and keep thee; which
he will do without my prayers, because the good and pure, of which
class my Dove is the best and purest, always dwell within the walls of
Heaven. I am in great haste, most beloved; so, embracing thee,

     I remain thy lovingest husband,

     NATH. HAWTHORNE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.

TO MISS PEABODY


     _Oak Hill_, April 13th, 1841

     _Ownest love_,

Here is thy poor husband in a polar Paradise! I know not how to
interpret this aspect of Nature--whether it be of good or evil omen to
our enterprise. But I reflect that the Plymouth pilgrims arrived in
the midst of storm and stept ashore upon mountain snow-drifts; and
nevertheless they prospered, and became a great people--and doubtless
it will be the same with us. I laud my stars, however, that thou wilt
not have thy first impressions of our future home from such a day as
this. Thou wouldst shiver all thy life afterwards, and never realise
that there could be bright skies, and green hills and meadows, and
trees heavy with foliage, when now the whole scene is a great
snow-bank, and the sky full of snow likewise. Through faith, I persist
in believing that spring and summer will come in their due season; but
the unregenerated man shivers within me, and suggests a doubt
whether I may not have wandered within the precincts of the Arctic
circle, and chosen my heritage among everlasting snows. Dearest,
provide thyself with a good stock of furs; and if thou canst obtain
the skin of a polar bear, thou wilt find it a very suitable summer
dress for this region. Thou must not hope ever to walk abroad, except
upon snow-shoes, nor to find any warmth, save in thy husband's heart.

Belovedest, I have not yet taken my first lesson in agriculture, as
thou mayst well suppose--except that I went to see our cows foddered,
yesterday afternoon. We have eight of our own; and the number is now
increased by a transcendental heifer, belonging to Miss Margaret
Fuller. She is very fractious, I believe, and apt to kick over the
milk pail. Thou knowest best, whether in these traits of character,
she resembles her mistress. Thy husband intends to convert himself
into a milk-maid, this evening; but I pray heaven that Mr. Ripley may
be moved to assign him the kindliest cow in the herd--otherwise he
will perform his duty with fear and trembling.

Ownest wife, I like my brethren in affliction very well; and couldst
thou see us sitting round our table, at meal-times, before the great
kitchen-fire, thou wouldst call it a cheerful sight. Mrs. Parker is
a most comfortable woman to behold; she looks as if her ample person
were stuffed full of tenderness--indeed, as if she were all one great,
kind heart. Wert thou here, I should ask for nothing more--not even
for sunshine and summer weather; for thou wouldst be both, to thy
husband. And how is that cough of thine, my belovedest? Hast thou
thought of me, in my perils and wanderings? I trust that thou dost
muse upon me with hope and joy; not with repining. Think that I am
gone before, to prepare a home for my Dove, and will return for her,
all in good time.

Thy husband has the best chamber in the house, I believe; and though
not quite so good as the apartment I have left, it will do very well.
I have hung up thy two pictures; and they give me a glimpse of summer
and of thee. The vase I intended to have brought in my arms, but could
not very conveniently do it yesterday; so that it still remains at
Mrs. Hillards's, together with my carpet. I shall bring them [at] the
next opportunity.

Now farewell, for the present, most beloved. I have been writing this
in my chamber; but the fire is getting low, and the house is old and
cold; so that the warmth of my whole person has retreated to my
heart, which burns with love for thee. I must run down to the kitchen
or parlor hearth, when thy image shall sit beside me--yea, be pressed
to my breast. At bed-time, thou shalt have a few lines more. Now I
think of it, dearest, wilt thou give Mrs. Ripley a copy of
Grandfather's Chair and Liberty Tree; she wants them for some boys
here. I have several copies of Famous Old People.

April 14th. 10 A.M. Sweetest, I did not milk the cows last night,
because Mr. Ripley was afraid to trust them to my hands, or me to
their horns--I know not which. But this morning, I have done wonders.
Before breakfast, I went out to the barn, and began to chop hay for
the cattle; and with such "righteous vehemence" (as Mr. Ripley says)
did I labor, that in the space of ten minutes, I broke the machine.
Then I brought wood and replenished the fires; and finally sat down to
breakfast and ate up a huge mound of buckwheat cakes. After breakfast,
Mr. Ripley put a four-pronged instrument into my hands, which he gave
me to understand was called a pitch-fork; and he and Mr. Farley being
armed with similar weapons, we all then commenced a gallant attack
upon a heap of manure. This office being concluded, and thy husband
having purified himself, he sits down to finish this letter to his
most beloved wife. Dearest, I will never consent that thou come within
half a mile of me, after such an encounter as that of this morning.
Pray Heaven that his letter retain none of the fragrance with which
the writer was imbued. As for thy husband himself, he is peculiarly
partial to the odor; but that whimsical little nose of thine might
chance to quarrel with it.

Belovedest, Miss Fuller's cow hooks the other cows, and has made
herself ruler of the herd, and behaves in a very tyrannical manner.
Sweetest, I know not when I shall see thee; but I trust it will not be
longer than the end of next week. I love thee! I love thee! I wouldst
thou wert with me; for then would my labor be joyful--and even now it
is not sorrowful. Dearest, I shall make an excellent husbandman. I
feel the original Adam reviving within me.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Oak Hill_, April 16th, Â½ past 6 A.M. [1841]

Most beloved, I have a few moments to spare before breakfast; and
perhaps thou wilt let me spend them in talking to thee. Thy two
letters blessed me yesterday, having been brought by some private
messenger of Mrs. Ripley's. Very joyful was I to hear from my Dove,
and my heart gave a mighty heave and swell. That cough of thine--I do
wish it would take its departure, for I cannot bear to think of thy
tender little frame being shaken with it all night long.

Dearest, since I last wrote thee, there has been an addition to our
community of four gentlemen in sables, who promise to be among our
most useful and respectable members. They arrived yesterday, about
noon. Mr. Ripley had proposed to them to join us, no longer ago than
that very morning. I had some conversation with them in the afternoon,
and was glad to hear them express much satisfaction with their new
abode, and all the arrangements. They do not appear to be very
communicative, however--or perhaps it may be merely an external
reserve, like that of thy husband, to shield their delicacy. Several
of their prominent characteristics, as well as their black attire,
lead me to believe that they are members of the clerical profession;
but I have not yet ascertained from their own lips, what has been the
nature of their past lives. I trust to have much pleasure in their
society, and, sooner or later, that we shall all of us derive great
strength from our intercourse with them. I cannot too highly applaud
the readiness with which these four gentlemen in black have thrown
aside all the fopperies and flummeries, which have their origin in a
false state of society. When I last saw them, they looked as
heroically regardless of the stains and soils incident to our
profession, as thy husband did when he emerged from the gold mine.

Ownest wife, thy husband has milked a cow!!!

Belovedest, the herd have rebelled against the usurpation of Miss
Fuller's cow; and whenever they are turned out of the barn, she is
compelled to take refuge under our protection. So much did she impede
thy husband's labors, by keeping close to him, that he found it
necessary to give her two or three gentle pats with a shovel; but
still she preferred to trust herself to my tender mercies, rather
than venture among the horns of the herd. She is not an amiable cow;
but she has a very intelligent face, and seems to be of a reflective
cast of character. I doubt not that she will soon perceive the
expediency of being on good terms with the rest of the sisterhood. I
have not been twenty yards from our house and barn; but I begin to
perceive that this is a beautiful place. The scenery is of a mild and
placid character, with nothing bold in its character; but I think its
beauties will grow upon us, and make us love it the more, the longer
we live here. There is a brook, so near the house that we shall [be]
able to hear it ripple, in the summer evenings; but, for agricultural
purposes, it has been made to flow in a straight and rectangular
fashion, which does it infinite damage, as a picturesque object.

Naughtiest, it was a moment or two before I could think whom thou
didst mean by Mr. Dismal View. Why, he is one of the best of the
brotherhood, so far as cheerfulness goes; for, if he do not laugh
himself, he makes the rest of us laugh continually. He is the
quaintest and queerest personage thou didst ever see--full of dry
jokes, the humor of which is so incorporated with the strange
twistifications of his physiognomy, that his sayings ought to be
written down, accompanied with illustrations by Cruikshank. Then he
keeps quoting innumerable scraps of Latin, and makes classical
allusions, while we are turning over the gold mine; and the contrast
between the nature of his employment and the character of his thoughts
is irresistibly ludicrous.

Sweetest, I have written this epistle in the parlor, while Farmer
Ripley, and Farmer Farley, and Farmer Dismal View, are talking about
their agricultural concerns, around the fire. So thou wilt not wonder
if it is not a classical piece of composition, either in point of
thought or expression. I shall have just time before breakfast is
ready--the boy has just come to call us now--but still I will tell
thee that I love thee infinitely; and that I long for thee
unspeakably, but yet with a happy longing. The rest of them have gone
into the breakfast room;...

(Portion of letter missing)

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, April 28th, 1841--7 A.M.

Mine ownest, what a beautiful bright morning is this! I do trust that
thou hast not suffered so much from the late tremendous weather, as to
be unable now to go abroad in the sunshine. I tremble, almost, to
think how thy tender frame has been shaken by that continual cough,
which cannot but have grown more inveterate throughout these
interminable ages of east wind. At times, dearest, it has seemed an
absolute necessity for me to see thee and find out for a certain truth
whether thou wert well or ill. Even hadst thou been here, thou wouldst
have been penetrated to the core with the chill blast. Then how must
thou have been afflicted, where it comes directly from the sea.

Belovedest, thy husband was caught by a cold, during his visit to
Boston. It has not affected his whole frame, but took entire
possession of his head, as being the weakest and most vulnerable
part. Never didst thou hear anybody sneeze with such vehemence and
frequency; and his poor brain has been in a thick fog--or rather, it
seemed as if his head were stuffed with coarse wool. I know not when I
have been so pestered before; and sometimes I wanted to wrench off my
head, and give it a great kick, like a foot-ball. This annoyance has
made me endure the bad weather with even less than ordinary patience;
and my faith was so far exhausted, that, when they told me yesterday
that the sun was setting clear, I would not even turn my eyes towards
the west. But, this morning, I am made all over anew; and have no
greater remnant of my cold, than will serve as an excuse for doing no
work to-day. Dearest, do not let Mrs. Ripley frighten thee with
apocryphal accounts of my indisposition. I have told thee the whole
truth. I do believe that she delights to disquiet people with doubts
and fears about their closest friends; for, once or twice, she has
made thy cough a bugbear to thy husband. Nevertheless, I will not
judge too harshly of the good lady, because I like her very well, in
many respects.

The family has been dismal and dolorous, throughout the storm. The
night before last, William Allen was stung by a wasp, on the eyelid;
whereupon, the whole side of his face swelled to an enormous
magnitude; so that, at the breakfast table, one half of him looked
like a blind giant (the eye being closed) and the other half had such
a sorrowful and ludicrous aspect, that thy husband was constrained to
laugh, out of sheer pity. The same day, a colony of wasps was
discovered in thy husband's chamber, where they had remained
throughout the winter, and were now just bestirring themselves,
doubtless with the intention of stinging me from head to foot. Thou
wilt readily believe, that not one of the accursed crew escaped my
righteous vengeance. A similar discovery was made in Mr. Farley's
room. In short, we seem to have taken up our abode in a wasps' nest.
Thus thou seest, belovedest, that a rural life is not one of unbroken
quiet and serenity.

If the middle of the day prove warm and pleasant, thy husband promises
himself to take a walk, in every step of which thou shalt be his
companion. Oh, how I long for thee to stay with me; in reality, among
the hills, and dales, and woods, of our home. I have taken one walk,
with Mr. Farley; and I could not have believed that there was such
seclusion, at so short a distance from a great city. Many spots seem
hardly to have been visited for ages--not since John Eliot preached to
the Indians here. If we were to travel a thousand miles, we could not
escape the world more completely than we can here.

Sweetest, I long unspeakably to see thee--it is only the thought of
thee that draws my spirit out of this solitude. Otherwise, I care
nothing for the world nor its affairs. I read no newspapers, and
hardly remember who is President; and feel as if I had no more concern
with what other people trouble themselves about, than if I dwelt in
another planet. But, still, thou drawest me to thee continually; and
so I can realise how a departed spirit feels, while looking back from
another world to the beloved ones of this. All other interests appear
like shadows and trifles; but love is a reality, which makes the
spirit still an inhabitant of the world which it has quitted.

Ownest wife, if Mr. Ripley comes into Boston on Sunday, it is my
purpose to accompany him. Otherwise, thou mayst look for me some time
during the ensuing week. Be happy, dearest; and above all, do shake
off that tremendous cough. Take great care of thyself, and never
venture out when there is the least breath of east-wind; but spread
thy wings in the sunshine, and be joyous as itself.

God bless thee.

     THINE OWNEST.

Will thy father have the goodness to leave the letter for Colonel Hall
at the Post Office?

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, May 4th, 1841. Â½ past 1 P.M.

Belovedest, as Mr. Ripley is going to the city this afternoon, I
cannot but write a letter to thee, though I have but little time; for
the corn field will need me very soon. My cold no longer troubles me;
and all this morning, I have been at work under the clear blue sky, on
a hill side. Sometimes it almost seemed as if I were at work in the
sky itself; though the material in which I wrought was the ore from
our gold mine. Nevertheless, there is nothing so unseemly and
disagreeable in this sort of toil, as thou wouldst think. It defiles
the hands, indeed, but not the soul. This gold ore is a pure and
wholesome substance; else our Mother Nature would not devour it so
readily, and derive so much nourishment from it, and return such a
rich abundance of good grain and roots in requital of it.

The farm is growing very beautiful now--not that we yet see anything
of the pease or potatoes, which we have planted; but the grass blushes
green on the slopes and hollows. I wrote that word blush almost
unconsciously; so we will let it go as an inspired utterance. When I
go forth afield, I think of my Dove, and look beneath the stone walls,
where the verdure is richest, in hopes that a little company of
violets, or some solitary bud, prophetic of the summer, may be there;
to which I should award the blissful fate of being treasured for a
time in thy bosom; for I doubt not, dearest, that thou wouldst admit
any flowers of thy husband's gathering into that sweetest place. But
not a wild flower have I yet found. One of the boys gathered some
yellow cowslips, last Sunday; but I am well content not to have found
them; for they are not precisely what I should like to send my Dove,
though they deserve honor and praise, because they come to us when no
others will. We have our parlor here dressed in evergreen, as at
Christmas. That beautifullest little flower vase of thine stands on
Mr. Ripley's study table, at which I am now writing. It contains some
daffodils and some willow blossoms. I brought it here, rather than
kept it in my chamber, because I never sit there, and it gives me many
pleasant emotions to look round and be surprised (for it is often a
surprise, though I well know that it is there) by something which is
connected with the idea of thee.

Most dear wife, I cannot hope that thou art yet entirely recovered
from that terrible influenza; but if thou art not almost well, I know
not how thy husband will endure it. And that cough too. It is the only
one of thy utterances, so far as I have heard them, which I do not
love. Wilt thou not be very well, and very lightsome, at our next
meeting. I promise myself to be with thee next Thursday, the day after
tomorrow. It is an eternity since we met; and I can nowise account for
my enduring this lengthened absence so well. I do not believe that I
could suffer it, if I were not engaged in a righteous and
heaven-blessed way of life. When I was in the Custom-House, and then
at Salem, I was not half so patient; though my love of thee has grown
infinitely since then.

We had some tableaux last evening, the principal characters being
sustained by Mr. Farley and Miss Ellen Slade. They went off very well.
I would like to see a tableaux arranged by my Dove.

Dearest, I fear it is time for thy clod-compelling husband to take the
field again. Good bye.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, June 1st, 1841--nearly 6 A.M.

     _Very dearest_,

I have been too busy to write thee a long letter by this opportunity;
for I think this present life of mine gives me an antipathy to pen and
ink, even more than my Custom-House experience did. I could not live
without the idea of thee, nor without spiritual communion with thee;
but, in the midst of toil, or after a hard day's work in the gold
mine, my soul obstinately refuses to be poured out on paper. That
abominable gold mine! Thank God, we anticipate getting rid of its
treasures, in the course of two or three days. Of all hateful places,
that is the worst; and I shall never comfort myself for having spent
so many days of blessed sunshine there. It is my opinion, dearest,
that a man's soul may be buried and perish under a dung-heap or in a
furrow of the field, just as well as under a pile of money. Well; that
giant, Mr. George Bradford, will probably be here to-day; so there
will be no danger of thy husband being under the necessity of laboring
more than he likes, hereafter. Meantime, my health is perfect, and my
spirits buoyant, even in the gold mine.

And how art thou, belovedest? Two or three centuries have passed since
I saw thee; and then thou wast pale and languid. Thou didst comfort me
in that little note of thine; but still I cannot help longing to be
informed of thy present welfare. Thou art not a prudent little Dove,
and wast naughty to come on such a day as thou didst; and it seems to
me that Mrs. Ripley does not know how to take care of thee at all. Art
thou quite well now?

Dearest wife, I intend to come and see thee either on Thursday or
Friday--perhaps my visit may be deferred till Saturday, if the gold
mine should hold out so long. I yearn for thee unspeakably. Good bye
now; for the breakfast horn has sounded, some time since. God bless
thee, ownest.

     THY LOVINGEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Friday, July 9th, Â½ past 5 P.M. [1841]

Oh, unutterably ownest wife, no pen can write how I have longed for
thee, or for any the slightest word from thee; for thy Sunday's letter
did not reach me till noon of this very day! Never was such a thirst
of the spirit as I have felt. I began to wonder whether my Dove did
really exist, or was only a vision; and canst thou imagine what a
desolate feeling that was. Oh, I need thee, my wife, every day, and
every hour, and every minute, and every minutest particle of forever
and forever.

Belovedest, the robe reached me in due season, and on Sabbath day, I
put it on; and truly it imparted such a noble and stately aspect to
thy husband, that thou couldst not possibly have known him. He did
really look tolerably personable! and, moreover, he felt as if thou
wert embracing him, all the time that he was wrapt in the folds of
this precious robe. Hast thou made it of such immortal stuff as the
robes of Bunyan's Pilgrim were made of? else it would grieve my very
heart to subject it to the wear and tear of the world.

Belovedest, when dost thou mean to come home? It is a whole eternity
since I saw thee. If thou art at home on a Sunday, I must and will
spend it with my ownest wife. Oh, how my heart leaps at the thought.

God bless thee, thou belovedest woman-angel! I cannot write a single
word more; for I have stolen the time to write this from the labors of
the field. I ought to be raking hay, like my brethren, who will have
to labor the longer and later, on account of these few moments which I
have given to thee. Now that we are in the midst of haying, we return
to our toil, after an early supper. I think I never felt so vigorous
as now; but, oh, I cannot be well without thee. Farewell,

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Aug. 13th, 1841

Dearest unutterably, Mrs. Ripley is going to Boston this morning, to
Miss Slade's wedding; so I sit down to write a word to thee, not
knowing whither to direct it. My heart searches for thee, but wanders
about vaguely, and is strangely dissatisfied. Where art thou? I fear
that thou didst spend yesterday in the unmitigated east wind of the
seacoast. Perhaps thou art shivering, at this moment.

Dearest, I would that I were with thee. It seems as if all evil things
had more power over thee, when I am away. Then thou art exposed to
noxious winds, and to pestilence, and to death-like weariness; and,
moreover, nobody knows how to take care of thee but thy husband.
Everybody else thinks it of importance that thou shouldst paint and
sculpture; but it would be no trouble to me, if thou shouldst never
touch clay or canvas again. It is not what thou dost, but what thou
art, that I concern myself about. And if thy mighty works are to be
wrought only by the anguish of thy head, and weariness of thy frame,
and sinking of thy heart, then do I never desire to see another. And
this should be the feeling of all thy friends. Especially ought it to
be thine, for thy husband's sake.

Belovedest, I am very well, and not at all weary; for yesterday's rain
gave us a holyday; and moreover the labors of the farm are not as
pressing as they have been. And--joyful thought!--in a little more
than a fortnight, thy husband will be free from his bondage--free to
think of his Dove--free to enjoy Nature--free to think and feel! I do
think that a greater weight will then be removed from me, than when
Christian's burthen fell off at the foot of the cross. Even my
Custom-House experience was not such a thraldom and weariness; my mind
and heart were freer. Oh, belovedest, labor is the curse of the world,
and nobody can meddle with it, without becoming proportionably
brutified. Dost thou think it a praiseworthy matter, that I have spent
five golden months in providing food for cows and horses? Dearest, it
is not so. Thank God, my soul is not utterly buried under a dung-heap.
I shall yet retain it, somewhat defiled, to be sure, but not utterly
unsusceptible of purification.

Farewell now, truest wife. It is time that this letter were sealed.
Love me; for I love thee infinitely, and pray for thee, and rejoice in
thee, and am troubled for thee--for I know not where thou art, nor how
thou dost.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Mr. Daniel Newhall,
     Lynn, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, 18th Aug. 1841. Â½ 12 P.M.

Belovedest, Mrs. Ripley met me at the door, as I came home from work,
and told me that Mary was at Mrs. Park's, and that I might have an
opportunity to send a message to thee. Whether thou hast written I do
not know. At all events, Mrs. Ripley has not yet given me the letter;
nor have I had a chance to ask her what she has heard about thee; such
a number of troublesome and intrusive people are there in this
thronged household of ours. Dearest, if thou hast not written, thou
art very sick--one or the other is certain. That wretched and foolish
woman! Why could not she have put the letter on my table, so that I
might have been greeted by it immediately on entering my room? She is
not fit to live.

Dearest, I am very well; only somewhat tired with walking half a dozen
miles immediately after breakfast, and raking hay ever since. We shall
quite finish haying this week; and then there will be no more very
hard or constant labor, during the one other week that I shall remain
a slave. Most beloved, I received thy Lynn letter on Saturday, and thy
Boston letter yesterday. Then thou didst aver that thou wast very
well--but thou didst not call thyself magnificent. Why art thou not
magnificent? In thy former letter, thou sayest that thou hast not been
so well for two months past. Naughtiest wife, hast thou been unwell
for two months?

Ownest, since writing the above, I have been to dinner; and still Mrs.
Ripley has given no sign of having a letter for me; nor was it
possible for me to ask her--nor do I know when I can see her alone, to
inquire about thee. Surely thou canst not have let Mary come without a
letter. And if thou art sick, why did she come at all? Belovedest, the
best way is always to send thy letters by the mail; and then I shall
know where to find them.

Aug. 17th--After breakfast.--Dearest, thou didst not write--that seems
very evident. I have not, even yet, had an opportunity to ask Mrs.
Ripley about thee; for she was gone out last evening; and when she
came back, Miss Ripley and another lady were with her. She mentioned,
however, that thy sister Mary looked very bright and happy; so I
suppose thou couldst not be very intensely and dangerously sick. I
might have asked Mrs. Ripley how thou didst, even in the presence of
those two women; but I have an inexpressible and unconquerable
reluctance to speak of thee to almost anybody. It seems a sin. Well; I
do not feel so apprehensive about thy health as I did yesterday; but,
sweetest, if thou hadst sent some distinct message, even though not a
letter, it would have saved thy husband some disquietude. Now farewell
for the present. I do long to see thee, but know not how to get to
thee. Dost thou love me at all? It is a great while since thou hast
told me so.

Ownest wife, I meant to have finished this letter this afternoon, and
to have sent it by William Allen in the morning; but I have just
learnt that Mr. Ripley is about to start for Boston; so I conclude
suddenly. God bless thee, and make thee magnificent, and keep thee so
forever and ever. I love thee. I love thee.

     Thine Ownest.

Do not write to me, if thou art not well.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.

[blank page]




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Aug. 22nd, 1841

Most dear wife, it seems a long time since I have written to thee.
Dost thou love me at all? I should have been reprehensible in not
writing, the last time Mr. and Mrs. Ripley went to town; but I had an
indispensable engagement in the bean-field--whither, indeed, I was
glad to betake myself, in order to escape a parting scene with poor
Mr. Farley. He was quite out of his wits, the night before, and thy
husband sat up with him till long past midnight. The farm is
pleasanter now that he is gone; for his unappeasable wretchedness
threw a gloom over everything. Since I last wrote to thee, we have
done haying; and the remainder of my bondage will probably be light.
It will be a long time, however, before I shall know how to make a
good use of leisure, either as regards enjoyment or literary
occupation.

When am I to see thee again? The first of September comes a week from
Tuesday next; but I think I shall ante-date the month, and compel it
to begin on Sunday. Wilt thou consent? Then, on Saturday afternoon,
(for I will pray Mr. Ripley to give me up so much time, for the sake
of my past diligence) I will come to thee, dearest wife, and remain in
the city till Monday evening. Thence I shall go to Salem, and spend a
week there, longer or shorter according to the intensity of the
occasion for my presence. I do long to see our mother and sisters; and
I should not wonder if they felt some slight desire to see me. I
received a letter from Louisa, a week or two since, scolding me most
pathetically for my long absence. Indeed, I have been rather naughty
in this respect; but I knew that it would be unsatisfactory to them
and myself, if I came only for a single day--and that has been the
longest space that I could command.

Dearest wife, it is extremely doubtful whether Mr. Ripley will succeed
in locating his community on this farm. He can bring Mr. Ellis to no
terms; and the more they talk about the matter, the farther they
appear to be from a settlement. Thou and I must form other plans for
ourselves; for I can see few or no signs that Providence purposes to
give us a home here. I am weary, weary, thrice weary of waiting so
many ages. Yet what can be done? Whatever may be thy husband's
gifts, he has not hitherto shown a single one that may avail to gather
gold. I confess that I have strong hopes of good from this arrangement
with Munroe; but when I look at the scanty avails of my past literary
efforts, I do not feel authorized to expect much from the future.
Well; we shall see. Other persons have bought large estates and built
splendid mansions with such little books as I mean to write; so
perhaps it is not unreasonable to hope that mine may enable me to
build a little cottage--or, at least, to buy or hire one. But I am
becoming more and more convinced, that we must not lean upon the
community. Whatever is to be done, must be done by thy husband's own
individual strength. Most beloved, I shall not remain here through the
winter, unless with an absolute certainty that there will be a home
ready for us in the spring. Otherwise I shall return to
Boston,--still, however, considering myself an associate of the
community; so that we may take advantage of any more favorable aspect
of affairs. Dearest, how much depends on these little books! Methinks,
if anything could draw out my whole strength, it should be the motives
that now press upon me. Yet, after all, I must keep these
considerations out of my mind, because an external purpose always
disturbs, instead of assisting me.

Dearest, I have written the above in not so good spirits as sometimes;
but now that I have so ungenerously thrown my despondency on thee, my
heart begins to throb more lightly. I doubt not that God has great
good in store for us; for He would not have given us so much, unless
He were preparing to give a great deal more. I love thee! Thou lovest
me! What present bliss! What sure and certain hope!

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Sept. 3d, 1841--4 o'clock P.M.

Most beloved,--Thou dost not expect a letter from thy husband; and
yet, perhaps, thou wilt not be absolutely displeased should one come
to thee tomorrow. At all events, I feel moved to write; though the
haze and sleepiness, which always settles upon me here, will certainly
be perceptible in every line. But what a letter didst thou write to
me! Thou lovest like a celestial being, (as truly thou art,) and dost
express thy love in heavenly language;--it is like one angel writing
to another angel; but alas! the letter has miscarried, and has been
delivered to a most unworthy mortal. Now wilt thou exclaim against thy
husband's naughtiness! And truly he is very naughty. Well then; the
letter was meant for him, and could not possibly belong to any other
being, mortal or immortal. I will trust that thy idea of me is truer
than my own consciousness of myself.

Dearest, I have been out only once, in the day time, since my arrival.
How immediately and irrecoverably (if thou didst not keep me out of
the abyss) should I relapse into the way of life in which I spent my
youth! If it were not for my Dove, this present world would see no
more of me forever. The sunshine would never fall on me, no more than
on a ghost. Once in a while, people might discern my figure gliding
stealthily through the dim evening--that would be all. I should be
only a shadow of the night; it is thou that givest me reality, and
makest all things real for me. If, in the interval since I quitted
this lonely old chamber, I had found no woman (and thou wast the only
possible one) to impart reality and significance to life, I should
have come back hither ere now, with the feeling that all was a dream
and a mockery. Dost thou rejoice that thou hast saved me from such a
fate? Yes; it is a miracle worthy even of thee, to have converted a
life of shadows into the deepest truth, by thy magic touch.

Belovedest, I have not yet made acquaintance with Miss Polly Metis.
Mr. Foote was not in his office when I called there; so that my
introduction to the erudite Polly was unavoidably deferred. I went to
the Athenaeum this forenoon, and turned over a good many dusty books.
When we dwell together, I intend that my Dove shall do all the
reading that may be necessary, in the concoction of my various
histories; and she shall repeat the substance of her researches to me.
Thus will knowledge fall upon me like heavenly dew.

Sweetest, it seems very long already since I saw thee; but thou hast
been all the time in my thoughts; so that my being has been
continuous. Therefore, in one sense, it does not seem as if we had
parted at all. But really I should judge it to be twenty years since I
left Brook Farm; and I take this to be one proof that my life there
was an unnatural and unsuitable, and therefore an unreal one. It
already looks like a dream behind me. The real Me was never an
associate of the community; there has been a spectral Appearance
there, sounding the horn at day-break, and milking the cows, and
hoeing potatoes, and raking hay, toiling and sweating in the sun, and
doing me the honor to assume my name. But be thou not deceived, Dove,
of my heart. This Spectre was not thy husband. Nevertheless, it is
somewhat remarkable that thy husband's hands have, during the past
summer, grown very brown and rough; insomuch that many people persist
in believing that he, after all, was the aforesaid spectral
horn-sounder, cow-milker, potatoe-hoer, and hay-raker. But such
people do not know a reality from a shadow.

Enough of nonsense. Belovedest, I know not exactly how soon I shall
return to the Farm. Perhaps not sooner than a fortnight from tomorrow;
but, in that case. I shall pay thee an intermediate visit of one day.
Wilt thou expect me on Friday or Saturday next, from ten to twelve
o'clock on each day,--not earlier nor later.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Septr. 9th, 1841--A.M.

     _Ownest love,_

In my last letter, I left it uncertain whether I should come Friday or
Saturday, because I deemed it good to allow myself the freedom of
choosing the day that should be most vacant from all earthly care and
inconvenience, so that thou mightest be sure to meet the whole of me;
and, likewise, I desired to have a brightest and sunniest day, because
our meetings have so often been in clouds and drizzle. Also, I thought
it well that thy expectation of seeing thy husband should be diffused
over two days, so that the disappointment might be lessened, if it
were impossible for me to come on the very day appointed. But these
reasons are of no moment, since thou so earnestly desirest to know the
day and hour. Unless the sky fall, belovedest, I will come tomorrow. I
know of no obstacle; and if there were a million, it would be no
matter. When once we are together, our own world is round about us,
and all things else cease to exist.

Belovedest, thy letter of a week from Thursday reached me not till
Tuesday! It had got into the hands of the penny-post. Farewell,
ownest. I love thee with infinite intensity, and think of thee
continually.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Septr. 10th, 1841--A.M.

Most dear wife, thou canst not imagine how strange it seems to me that
thou shouldst ever suffer any bodily harm. I cannot conceive of
it--the idea will not take the aspect of reality. Thou art to me a
spirit gliding about our familiar paths; and I always feel as if thou
wert beyond the reach of mortal accident--nor am I convinced to the
contrary even by thy continual gashings of thy dearest fingers and
sprainings of thy ancle. I love thee into the next state of existence,
and therefore do not realise that thou art here as subject to
corporeal harm as is thy husband himself--nay, ten times more so,
because thy earthly manifestation is refined almost into spirit.

But, dearest, thy accident did make thy husband's heart flutter very
riotously. I wanted to hold thee in mine arms; for I had a foolish
notion that thou wouldst be much better--perhaps quite well! I cannot
tell thee all I felt; and still I had not the horrible feelings that
I should expect, because there was a shadowiness interposed between me
and the fact, so that it did not strike my heart, as the beam did thy
head. Let me not speak of it any more, lest it become too real.

Sweetest, thou dost please me much by criticising thy husband's
stories, and finding fault with them. I do not very well recollect
Monsieur de Miroir; but as to Mrs. Bullfrog, I give her up to thy
severest reprehension. The story was written as a mere experiment in
that style; it did not come from am depth within me--neither my heart
nor mind had anything to do with it. I recollect that the Man of
Adamant seemed a fine idea to me, when I looked at it prophetically;
but I failed in giving shape and substance to the vision which I saw.
I don't think it can be very good.

Ownest wife, I cannot believe all these stories about Munroe, because
such an abominable rascal never would be sustained and countenanced by
respectable men. I take him to be neither better nor worse than the
average of his tribe. However, I intend to have all my copy-rights
taken out in my own name; and if he cheats me once, I will have
nothing more to do with him, but will straightway be cheated by some
other publisher--that being, of course, the only alternative.

Dearest, what dost thou think of taking Governor Shirley's young
French wife as the subject of one of the cuts. Thou shouldst represent
her in the great chair, perhaps with a dressing glass before her, and
arrayed in all manner of fantastic finery, and with an outre French
air; while the old Governor is leaning fondly over her, and a Puritan
counsellor or two are manifesting their disgust, in the background. A
negro footman and French waiting maid might be in attendance. Do not
think that I expect thee to adopt my foolish fancies about these
things. Whatever thou mayst do, it will be better than I can think. In
Liberty Tree, thou mightest have a vignette, representing the chair in
a very battered, shattered, and forlorn condition, after it had been
ejected from Hutchinson's house. This would serve to impress the
reader with the woeful vicissitudes of sublunary things. Many other
subjects would thy husband suggest, but he is terribly afraid that
thou wouldst take one of them, instead of working out thine own
inspirations.

Belovedest, I long to see thee. Do be magnificently well by
Saturday--yet not on my account, but thine own. Meantime, take care of
thy dearest head. Thou art not fit to be trusted away from thy
husband's guidance, one moment.

Dear little wife, didst thou ever behold such an awful scribble as thy
husband writes, since he became a farmer? His chirography always was
abominable; but now it is outrageous.

God bless thee, dearest and may His hand be continually outstretched
over thy head. Expect me on Saturday afternoon.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, September 14th, 1841--A.M.

Ownest beloved, I know not whether thou dost expect a letter from thy
husband; but I have a comfortable faith that it will not be altogether
unwelcome; so I boldly sit down to scribble. I love thee
transcendently; and nothing makes me more sensible of the fact, than
that I write thee voluntary letters, without any external necessity.
It is as if intense love should make a dumb man speak. (Alas! I hear a
knocking at the door, and suspect that some untimely person is about
to call me away from my Dove.)

Afternoon.--Dearest, it was even as I suspected. How sad it is, that
we cannot be sure of one moment's uninterrupted communication, even
when we are talking together in that same old chamber, where I have
spent so many quiet years! Well; thou must be content to lose some
very sweet outpourings wherewith my heart would probably have covered
the first, and perhaps the second page of this sheet. The amount of
all would have been, that I am somewhat partial to thee--and thou hast
a suspicion of that fact, already.

Belovedest, Master Cheever is a very good subject for a
sketch--especially if thou dost portray him in the very act of
executing judgment on an evil-doer. The little urchin may be laid
across his knee, and his arms and legs (and whole person, indeed)
should be flying all abroad, in an agony of nervous excitement and
corporeal smart. The Master, on the other hand, must be calm, rigid,
without anger or pity, the very personification of that unmitigable
law, whereby suffering follows sin. Meantime, the lion's head should
have a sort of sly twist of one side of its mouth, and wink of one
eye, in order to give the impression, that, after all, the crime and
the punishment are neither of them the most serious things in the
world. I would draw this sketch myself, if I had but the use of thy
magic fingers. Why dost thou--being one and the same person with thy
husband--unjustly keep those delicate little instruments (thy fingers,
to wit) all to thyself?

Then, dearest, the Acadians will do very well for the second sketch.
Wilt thou represent them as just landing on the wharf?--or as
presenting themselves before Governor Shirley, seated in the great
chair? Another subject (if this do not altogether suit thee) might be
old Cotton Mather, venerable in a three cornered hat and other antique
attire, walking the streets of Boston, and lifting up his hands to
bless the people, while they all revile him. An old dame should be
seen flinging or emptying some vials of medicine on his head, from the
latticed window of an old-fashioned house; and all around must be
tokens of pestilence and mourning--as a coffin borne along, a woman or
children weeping on a door-step. Canst thou paint the tolling of the
old South bell?

If thou likest not this subject, thou canst take the military council,
holden at Boston by the Earl of Loudoun, and other captains and
governors--his lordship in the great chair, an old-fashioned military
figure, with a star on his breast. Some of Louis XV's commanders will
give thee the costume. On the table and scattered about the room must
be symbols of warfare, swords, pistols, plumed hats, a drum, trumpet,
and rolled up banner, in one heap. It were not amiss that thou
introduce the armed figure of an Indian chief, as taking part in the
council--or standing apart from the English, erect and stern.

Now for Liberty tree--there is an engraving of that famous vegetable
in Snow's History of Boston; but thou wilt draw a better one out of
thine own head. If thou dost represent it, I see not what scene can be
beneath it, save poor Mr. Oliver taking the oath. Thou must represent
him with a bag wig, ruffled sleeves, embroidered coat, and all such
ornaments, because he is the representative of aristocracy and
artificial system. The people may be as rough and wild as thy sweetest
fancy can make them;--nevertheless, there must be one or two grave,
puritanical figures in the midst. Such an one might sit in the great
chair, and be an emblem of that stern spirit, which brought about the
revolution. But thou wilt find this is a hard subject.

But what a dolt is thy husband, thus to obtrude his counsel in the
place of thine own inspiration! Belovedest, I want soon to tell thee
how I love thee. Thou must not expect me till Saturday afternoon. I
yearn infinitely to see thee. Heaven bless thee forever and forever.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Sept. 22d, 1841--P.M.

Dearest love, here is thy husband again, slowly adapting himself to
the life of this queer community, whence he seems to have been absent
half a life time--so utterly has he grown apart from the spirit and
manners of the place. Thou knowest not how much I wanted thee, to give
me a home-feeling in the spot--to keep a feeling of coldness and
strangeness from creeping into my heart and making me shiver.
Nevertheless, I was most kindly received; and the fields and woods
looked very pleasant, in the bright sunshine of the day before
yesterday. I had a friendlier disposition towards the farm, now that I
am no longer obliged to toil in its stubborn furrows. Yesterday and
to-day, however, the weather has been intolerable--cold, chill,
sullen, so that it is impossible to be on kindly terms with Mother
Nature. Would I were with thee, mine own warmest and truest-hearted
wife!

Belovedest, I doubt whether I shall succeed in writing another
volume of Grandfather's Library, while I remain at the farm. I have
not the sense of perfect seclusion, which has always been essential to
my power of producing anything. It is true, nobody intrudes into my
room; but still I cannot be quiet. Nothing here is settled--everything
is but beginning to arrange itself--and though thy husband would seem
to have little to do with aught beside his own thoughts, still he
cannot but partake of the ferment around him. My mind will not be
abstracted. I must observe, and think, and feel, and content myself
with catching glimpses of things which may be wrought out hereafter.
Perhaps it will be quite as well that I find myself unable to set
seriously about literary occupation for the present. It will be good
to have a longer interval between my labor of the body and that of the
mind. I shall work to the better purpose, after the beginning of
November. Meantime, I shall see these people and their enterprise
under a new point of view, and perhaps be able to determine whether
thou and I have any call to cast in our lot among them.

Sweetest, our letters have not yet been brought from the Post Office;
so that I have known nothing of thee since our parting. Surely we were
very happy--and never had I so much peace and joy as in brooding
over thine image, as thou wast revealed to me in our last interview. I
love thee with all the heart I have--and more. Now farewell, most
dear. Mrs. Ripley is to be the bearer of this letter; and I reserve
the last page for tomorrow morning. Perhaps I shall have a blessed
word from thee, ere then.

Septr. 23d--Before breakfast.--Sweetest wife, thou hast not written
to me. Nevertheless, I do not conclude thee to be sick, but will
believe that thou hast been busy in creating Laura Bridgman. What a
faithful and attentive husband thou hast! For once he has anticipated
thee in writing.

Belovedest, I do wish the weather would put off this sulky mood. Had
it not been for the warmth and brightness of Monday, when I arrived
here, I should have supposed that all sunshine had left Brook Farm
forever. I have no disposition to take long walks, in such a state of
the sky; nor have I any buoyancy of spirit. Thy husband is a very dull
person, just at this time. I suspect he wants thee. It is his purpose,
I believe, either to walk or ride to Boston, about the end of next
week, and give thee a kiss--after which he will return quietly and
contentedly to the farm. Oh, what joy, when he will again see thee
every day!

We had some tableaux last night. They were very stupid, (as, indeed,
was the case with all I have ever seen) but do not thou tell Mrs.
Ripley so. She is a good woman, and I like her better than I did--her
husband keeps his old place in my judgment. Farewell, thou gentlest
Dove--thou perfectest woman--

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_,
     Septr. 25th, 1841--Â½ past 7 A.M.

Ownest Dove, it was but just now that I thought of sending thee a few
lines by Mr. Ripley; for this penning of epistles is but a wretched
resource. What shall I do? What shall I do? To talk to thee in this
way does not bring thee nearer; it only compels me to separate myself
from thee, and put thee at a distance. Of all humbugs, pretending to
alleviate mortal woes, writing is the greatest.

Yet, thy two letters were a great comfort to me--so great, that they
could not possibly have been dispensed with. Dearest, I did not write
thee what Mr. and Mrs. Ripley said to me, because they have said
nothing which I did not know before. The ground, upon which I must
judge of the expediency of our abiding here, is not what they may say,
but what actually is, or is likely to be; and of this I doubt whether
either of them is capable of forming a correct opinion. Would that
thou couldst he here--or could have been here all summer--in order to
help me think what is to be done. But one thing is certain--I cannot
and will not spend the winter here. The time would be absolutely
thrown away, so far as regards any literary labor to be
performed,--and then to suffer this famished yearning for thee, all
winter long! It is impossible.

Dearest, do not thou wear thyself out with working upon that bust. If
it cause thee so much as a single head-ache, I shall wish that Laura
Bridgman were at Jericho. Even if thou shouldst not feel thyself
wearied at the time, I fear that the whole burthen of toil will fall
upon thee when all is accomplished. It is no matter if Laura should go
home without being sculptured--no matter if she goes to her grave
without it. I dread to have thee feel an outward necessity for such a
task; for this intrusion of an outward necessity into labors of the
imagination and intellect is, to me, very painful.

Oh, what weather! It seems to me as if every place were sunny, save
Brook Farm. Nevertheless, I had rather a pleasant walk to a distant
meadow, a day or two ago; and we found white and purple grapes, in
great abundance, ripe, and gushing with rich juice when the hand
pressed their clusters. Didst thou know what treasures of wild grapes
there are in this land. If we dwell here, we will make our own
wine--of which, I know, my Dove will want a great quantity.

Good bye, sweetest. If thou canst contrive to send me a glimpse of
sunshine, I will be the gratefullest husband on earth. I love thee
inextinguishably. Thou hast no place to put all the love which I feel
for thee.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Septr. 27th, 1841. 7Â½ A.M.

_Dearest love,_

Thy two letters of business came both together, Saturday evening! What
an acute and energetic personage is my little Dove! I say it not in
jest (though with a smile) but in good earnest, and with a comfortable
purpose to commit all my business transactions to thee, when we dwell
together. And why dost thou seem to apprehend that thou mayst possibly
offend me. Thou canst do so never, but only make me love thee more and
more.

Now as to this affair with Munroe. I fully confide in thy opinion that
he intends to make an unequal bargain with thy poor simple and
innocent husband--never having doubted this, myself. But how is he to
accomplish it? I am not, nor shall be, in the least degree in his
power; whereas, he is, to a certain extent, in mine. He might announce
his projected library, with me for the editor, in all the newspapers
in the universe; but still I could not be bound to become the
editor, unless by my own act; nor should I have the slightest scruple
in refusing to be so, at the last moment, if he persisted in treating
me with injustice. Then, as for his printing Grandfather's Chair, I
have the copy-right in my own hands, and could and would prevent the
sale, or make him account to me for the profits, in case of need.
Meantime, he is making arrangements for publishing this library,
contracting with other booksellers, and with printers and engravers,
and, with every step, making it more difficult for himself to draw
back. I, on the other hand, do nothing which I should not do, if the
affair with Munroe were at an end; for if I write a book, it will be
just as available for some other publisher as for him. My dearest,
instead of getting me within his power by this delay, he has trusted
to my ignorance and simplicity, and has put _himself_ in _my_ power.
Show the contrary, if thou canst.

He is not insensible of this. At our last interview, he himself
introduced the subject of our bargain, and appeared desirous to close
it. But thy husband was not prepared, among other reasons, because I
do not yet see what materials I shall have for the republications in
the library; the works that he has shown me being all ill-adapted for
that purpose; and I wish first to see some French and German books,
which he has sent for to New York. And, belovedest, before concluding
the bargain, I have promised George Hillard to consult him and let him
do the business. Is not this consummate discretion? And is not thy
husband perfectly safe? Then why does my Dove put herself into a
fever? Rather, let her look at the matter with the same perfect
composure that I do, who see all around my own position, and know that
it is impregnable.

Most sweet wife, I cannot write thee any more at present, as Mr.
Ripley is going away instantaneously; but we will talk at length on
Saturday, when God means to send me to thee. I love thee infinitely,
and admire thee beyond measure, and trust thee in all things, and will
never transact any business without consulting thee--though on some
rare occasions, it may happen that I will have my own way, after all.
I feel inclined to break off this engagement with Munroe; as thou
advisest, though not for precisely the reasons thou urgest; but of
this hereafter.

     THY MOST OWN HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Septr. 29th, 1841.--A.M.

Ownest wife, I love thee most exceedingly--never so much before;
though I am sure I have loved thee through a past eternity. How dost
thou do? Dost thou remember that, the day after tomorrow, thou art to
meet thy husband? Does thy heart thrill at the thought?

Dearest love, thy husband was elected to two high offices, last
night--viz., to be a Trustee of the Brook Farm estate, and Chairman of
the Committee of Finance!!!! Now dost thou not blush to have formed so
much lower an opinion of my business talents, than is entertained by
other discerning people? From the nature of my office, I shall have
the chief direction of all the money affairs of the community--the
making of bargains--the supervision of receipts and expenditures &c.
&c. &c. Thou didst not think of this, when thou didst pronounce me
unfit to make a bargain with that petty knave of a publisher. A
prophet has no honor among those of his own kindred, nor a financier
in the judgment of his wife.

Belovedest, my accession to these august offices does not at all
decide the question of my remaining here permanently. I told Mr.
Ripley, that I could not spend the winter at the farm, and that it was
quite uncertain whether I returned in the spring.

Now, farewell, most dear and sweet wife. Of course, thou canst not
expect that a man in eminent public station will have much time to
devote to correspondence with a Dove. I will remember thee in the
intervals of business, and love thee in all my leisure moments. Will
not this satisfy thee?

God bless thee, mine ownest--my treasure--thou gold and diamond of my
soul!--my possession forever--my enough and to spare, yet never,
never, to be spared! Sweetest, if it should be very stormy on
Saturday, expect me not--but the first fair day thereafter.

I put all my love into one kiss, and have twice as much left as
before.

     THY TRUEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, Octr. 9th--Before Breakfast [1841]

     _Most dear,_

Here is thy husband trying to write to thee, while it is so dark that
he can hardly see his own scribble--not that it is very early; for the
sun is up long ago, and ought to be shining into my window. But this
dismal gloom! I positively cannot submit to have this precious month
all darkened with cloud and sullied with drizzle.

Dearest, I return the manuscript tale. It is pretty enough; but I
doubt whether it be particularly suited to the American public; and,
if intended for publication, I trust it will undergo a very severe
revision. It will need it. I speak frankly about this matter; but I
should do the same (only more frankly still) if the translation were
my Dove's own.

I wonder whether Munroe has yet returned Grandfather's Chair to
Elizabeth. I send back his books to-day.

Belovedest, I think thou wilt see me in the latter half of next week.
Thou needest not to give up any visit to South Boston on this account;
for I cannot get to thee before twelve o'clock. It will be but an hour
or so's visit.

Thine with deepest and keenest love,

     THEODORE DE L'AUBEPINE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Brook Farm_, October 18th, Saturday [1841]

Most dear wife, I received thy letter and note, last night, and was
much gladdened by them; for never has my soul so yearned for thee as
now. But, belovedest, my spirit is moved to talk to thee to day about
these magnetic miracles, and to beseech thee to take no part in them.
I am unwilling that a power should be exercised on thee, of which we
know neither the origin nor the consequence, and the phenomena of
which seem rather calculated to bewilder us, than to teach us any
truths about the present or future state of being. If I possessed such
a power over thee, I should not dare to exercise it; nor can I consent
to its being exercised by another. Supposing that this power arises
from the transfusion of one spirit into another, it seems to me that
the sacredness of an individual is violated by it; there would be an
intrusion into thy holy of holies--and the intruder would not be thy
husband! Canst thou think, without a shrinking of thy soul, of any
human being coming into closer communion with thee than I may?--than
either nature or my own sense of right would permit me? I cannot. And,
dearest, thou must remember, too, that thou art now a part of me, and
that, by surrendering thyself to the influence of this magnetic lady,
thou surrenderest more than thine own moral and spiritual
being--allowing that the influence _is_ a moral and spiritual one.
And, sweetest, I really do not like the idea of being brought, through
thy medium, into such an intimate relation with Mrs. Park!

Now, ownest wife, I have no faith whatever that people are raised to
the seventh heaven, or to any heaven at all, or that they gain any
insight into the mysteries of life beyond death, by means of this
strange science. Without distrusting that the phenomena which thou
tellest me of, and others as remarkable, have really occurred, I think
that they are to be accounted for as the result of a physical and
material, not of a spiritual, influence. _Opium_ has produced many a
brighter vision of heaven (and just as susceptible of proof) than
those which thou recountest. They are dreams, my love--and such dreams
as thy sweetest fancy, either waking or sleeping, could vastly
improve upon. And what delusion can be more lamentable and
mischievous, than to mistake the physical and material for the
spiritual? What so miserable as to lose the soul's true, though
hidden, knowledge and consciousness of heaven, in the mist of an
earth-born vision? Thou shalt not do this. If thou wouldst know what
heaven is, before thou comest thither hand in hand with thy husband,
then retire into the depths of thine own spirit, and thou wilt find it
there among holy thoughts and feelings; but do not degrade high Heaven
and its inhabitants into any such symbols and forms as those which
Miss Larned describes--do not let an earthly effluence from Mrs.
Park's corporeal system bewilder thee, and perhaps contaminate
something spiritual and sacred. I should as soon think of seeking
revelations of the future state in the rottenness of the grave--where
so many do seek it.

Belovedest wife, I am sensible that these arguments of mine may appear
to have little real weight; indeed, what I write does no sort of
justice to what I think. But I care the less for this, because I know
that my deep and earnest feeling upon the subject will weigh more with
thee than all the arguments in the world. And thou wilt know that the
view which I take of this matter is caused by no want of faith in
mysteries, but from a deep reverence of the soul, and of the mysteries
which it knows within itself, but never transmits to the earthly eye
or ear. Keep thy imagination sane--that is one of the truest
conditions of communion with Heaven.

Dearest, after these grave considerations, it seems hardly worth while
to submit a merely external one; but as it occurs to me, I will write
it. I cannot think, without invincible repugnance, of thy holy name
being bruited abroad in connection with these magnetic phenomena. Some
(horrible thought!) would pronounce my Dove an impostor; the great
majority would deem thee crazed; and even the few believers would feel
a sort of interest in thee, which it would be anything but pleasant to
excite. And what adequate motive can there be for exposing thyself to
all this misconception? Thou wilt say, perhaps, that thy visions and
experiences would never be known. But Miss Larned's are known to all
who choose to listen.

October 19th. Monday.--Most beloved, what a preachment have I made to
thee! I love thee, I love thee, I love thee, most infinitely. Love is
the true magnetism. What carest thou for any other? Belovedest, it is
probable that thou wilt see thy husband tomorrow. Art thou
magnificent? God bless thee. What a bright day is here; but the woods
are fading now. It is time I were in the city, for the winter.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


_Brook Farm_, October 21st, 1841--Noon

Ownest beloved, I know thou dost not care in the least about receiving
a word from thy husband--thou lovest me not--in fact thou hast quite
forgotten that such a person exists. I do love thee so much, that I
really think that all the love is on my side;--there is no room for
any more in the whole universe.

Sweetest, I have nothing at all to say to thee--nothing, I mean, that
regards this external world; and as to matters of the heart and soul,
they are not to be written about. What atrocious weather! In all this
month, we have not had a single truly October day; it has been a real
November month, and of the most disagreeable kind. I came to this
place in one snowstorm, and shall probably leave it in another; so
that my reminiscences of Brook Farm are like to be the coldest and
dreariest imaginable. But next month, thou, belovedest, will be my
sunshine and my summer. No matter what weather it may be then.

Dearest, good bye. Dost thou love me after all? Art thou magnificently
well? God bless thee. Thou didst make me infinitely happiest, at our
last meeting. Was it a pleasant season likewise to thee?

     Thine ownest,

     THEODORE DE L'AUBEPINE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


_Salem_, Novr. 27th, 1841

_Dearest Soul,_

I know not whether thou wilt have premonitions of a letter from thy
husband; but I feel absolutely constrained to write thee a few lines
this morning, before I go up in town. I love thee--I love thee--and I
have no real existence but in thee. Never before did my bosom so yearn
for the want of thee--so thrill at the thought of thee. Thou art a
mighty enchantress, my little Dove, and hast quite subdued a strong
man, who deemed himself independent of all the world. I am a captive
under thy little foot, and look to thee for life. Stoop down and kiss
me--or I die!

Dearest, I am intolerably weary of this old town; and I would that my
visits might not be oftener than once in ten years, instead of a
fortnight. Dost thou not think it really the most hateful place in all
the world? My mind becomes heavy and nerveless, the moment I set my
foot within its precincts. Nothing makes me wonder more than that I
found it possible to write all my tales in this same region of
sleepy-head and stupidity. But I suppose the characteristics of the
place are reproduced in the tales; and that accounts for the
overpowering disposition to slumber which so many people experience,
in reading thy husband's productions.

Belovedest, according to thy instructions, I have been very careful in
respect to mince-pies and other Thanksgiving dainties; and so have
passed pretty well through the perils of the carnival season. Thou art
a dearest little wife, and I would live on bread and water, to please
thee, even if such temperate regimen should produce no other good. But
truly thou art very wise in thy dietetic rules; and it is well that I
have such a wife to take care of me; inasmuch as I am accustomed to
eat whatever is given me, with an appetite as indiscriminate, though
not quite so enormous, as that of an ostrich. Setting aside fat pork,
I refuse no other Christian meat.

Dearest, I write of nothing; for I had nothing to write when I began,
save to make thee aware that I loved thee infinitely; and now that
thou knowest it, there is no need of saying a word more. On Monday
evening, please God, I shall see thee. How would I have borne it, if
thy visit to Ida Russel were to commence before my return to thine
arms?

God bless thee, mine ownest.

     THY TRUEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


54 Pinckney St., Jany. 1st, [1842]

_Very dearest,_

I would gladly go to Salem immediately if I could, but I am detained
here by some ceremonies, which are needful to be gone through,
previous to my final deliverance from the Custom-House. As Mr.
Bancroft is not expected back from Washington for some days, I shall
probably remain till nearly the close of next week. Meantime, I must
be near at hand, because my presence may be required at any moment.

Naughtiest, thou shouldst not put thy little white hands into cold
clay. Canst thou not use warm water? How canst thou hope for any
warmth of conception and execution, when thou art working with
material as cold as ice?

As to the proof-sheets, I think we need not trouble.... (Remainder of
letter missing)




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Jany. 20th, 1842--11 o'clock A.M.

     _Truest Heart,_

Here is thy husband in his old chamber, where he produced those
stupendous works of fiction, which have since impressed the Universe
with wonderment and awe! To this chamber, doubtless, in all succeeding
ages, pilgrims will come to pay their tribute of reverence;--they will
put off their shoes at the threshold, for fear of desecrating the
tattered old carpet. "There," they will exclaim, "is the very bed in
which he slumbered, and where he was visited by those ethereal
visions, which he afterward fixed forever in glowing words! There is
the wash-stand, at which this exalted personage cleansed himself from
the stains of earth, and rendered his outward man a fitting exponent
of the pure soul within. There, in its mahogany frame, is the
dressing-glass, which reflected that noble brow, those hyacinthine
locks, that mouth, bright with smiles, or tremulous with feeling,
that flashing or melting eye, that--in short, every item of the
magnanimous phiz of this unexampled man! There is the pine
table--there the old flag-bottomed chair--in which he sat, and at
which he scribbled, during his agonies of inspiration! There is the
old chest of drawers, in which he kept what shirts a poor author may
be supposed to have possessed! There is the closet, in which was
reposited his threadbare suit of black! There is the worn-out
shoe-brush with which this polished writer polished his boots. There
is--" but I believe this will be pretty much all;--so here I close the
catalogue.

Most dear, I love thee beyond all limits, and write to thee because I
cannot help it;--nevertheless, writing grows more and more an
inadequate and unsatisfactory mode of revealing myself to thee. I no
longer think of saying anything deep, because I feel that the deepest
and truest must remain unsaid. We have left expression--at least, such
expression as can be achieved with pen and ink--far behind us. Even
the spoken word has long been inadequate. Looks are a better language;
but, bye-and-bye, our spirits will demand some more adequate
expression even than these. And thus it will go on; until we shall be
divested of these earthly forms, which are at once our medium of
expression, and the impediments to full communion. Then we shall melt
into [one] another, and all be expressed, once and continually,
without a word--without an effort.

Belovedest, my cold is very comfortable now. Mrs. Hillard gave me some
homo--I don't know how to spell it--homeopathic medicine, of which I
took a dose last night; and shall not need another. Art thou likewise
well? Didst thou weary thy poor little self to death, yesterday? I do
not think that I could possibly undergo the fatigue and distraction of
mind which thou dost. Thou art ten times as powerful as I, because
thou art so much more ethereal.

Sweetest, thy husband has recently been both lectured about and
preached about, here in his native city. The preacher was Rev. Mr. Fox
of Newburyport; but how he contrived to hook me into a sermon, I know
not. I trust he took for his text that which was spoken of my namesake
of old--"Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile."
Belovedest, if ever thou shouldst happen to hear me lauded on any
public occasion, I shall expect thee to rise, and make thine own and
my acknowledgments, in a neat and appropriate speech. Wilt thou not?
Surely thou wilt--inasmuch as I care little for applause, save as it
shall please thee; so it is rather thy concern than mine.

Mine ownest, it is by no means comfortable to be separated from thee
three whole days at a time. It is too great a gap in life. There is no
sunshine in the days in which thou dost not shine on me. And speaking
of sunshine, what a beautifullest day (to the outward eye, I mean) was
yesterday; and to-day seems equally bright and gladsome, although I
have not yet tasted the fresh air. I trust that thou has flown abroad,
and soared upward to the seventh heaven. But do not stay there,
sweetest Dove! Come back for me; for I shall never get there, unless
by the aid of thy wings.

Now God bless thee, and make thee happy and joyful, until Saturday
evening, when thou must needs bear the infliction of

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, Feby. 27th, 1842--Forenoon

     _Thou dearest Heart,_

As it is uncertain whether I shall return to Boston tomorrow, I write
thee a letter; for I need to commune with thee; and even if I should
bring the scroll of my thoughts and feelings with me, perhaps thou
wilt not refuse to receive it. It is awful, almost (and yet I would
not have it otherwise, for the world) to feel how necessary thou hast
become to my well-being, and how my spirit is disturbed at a
separation from thee, and stretches itself out through the dimness and
distance to embrace its other self. Thou art my quiet and
satisfaction--not only my chiefest joy, but the condition of all other
enjoyments. When thou art away, vague fears and misgivings sometimes
steal upon me; there are heart-quakes and spirit-sinkings for no real
cause, and which never trouble me when thou art with me.

Belovedest, I have thought much of thy parting injunction to tell my
mother and sisters that thou art her daughter and their sister. I do
not think that thou canst estimate what a difficult task thou didst
propose to me--not that any awful and tremendous effect would be
produced by the disclosure; but because of the strange reserve, in
regard to matters of feeling, that has always existed among us. We are
conscious of one another's feelings, always; but there seems to be a
tacit law, that our deepest heart-concernments are not to be spoken
of. I cannot gush out in their presence--I cannot take my heart in my
hand, and show it to them. There is a feeling within me (though I know
it is a foolish one) as if it would be as indecorous to do so, as to
display to them the naked breast. And they are in the same state as
myself. None, I think, but delicate and sensitive persons could have
got into such a position; but doubtless this incapacity of free
communion, in the hour of especial need, is meant by Providence as a
retribution for something wrong in our early intercourse.

Then it is so hard to speak of thee--_really_ of thee--to anybody! I
doubt whether I ever have _really_ spoken of thee to any person. I
have spoken the name of Sophia, it is true; but the idea in my mind
was apart from thee--it embraced nothing of thine inner and essential
self; it was an outward and faintly-traced shadow that I summoned
up, to perform thy part, and which I placed in the midst of thy
circumstances; so that thy sister Mary, or Mrs. Ripley, or even
Margaret, were deceived, and fancied that I was talking about thee.
But there didst thou lie, thy real self, in my deepest, deepest heart,
while far above, at the surface, this distant image of thee was the
subject of talk. And it was not without an effort which few are
capable of making, that I could ever do so much; and even then I felt
as if it were profane. Yet I spoke to persons from whom, if from any,
I might expect true sympathy in regard to thee.

I tell thee these things, in order that my Dove, into whose infinite
depths the sunshine falls continually, may perceive what a cloudy veil
stretches over the abyss of my nature. Thou wilt not think that it is
caprice or stubbornness that has made me hitherto resist thy wishes.
Neither. I think, is it a love of secrecy and darkness. I am glad to
think that God sees through my heart; and if any angel has power to
penetrate into it, he is welcome to know everything that is there.
Yes; and so may any mortal, who is capable of full sympathy, and
therefore worthy to come into my depths. But he must find his own way
there. I can neither guide him nor enlighten him. It is this
involuntary reserve, I suppose, that has given the objectivity to my
writings. And when people think that I am pouring myself out in a tale
or essay, I am merely telling what is common to human nature, not what
is peculiar to myself. I sympathise with them--not they with me.

Feb. 28th--Forenoon.--Sweetest, thou shalt have this letter instead of
thy husband, to-night. Dost thou love me? I shall not find any letter
from thee at the Post Office, because thou dost expect to hear my
footsteps on thy staircase, at six o'clock this evening. Oh, but
another day will quickly pass; and then this yearning of the soul will
be appeased, for a little while at least. I wonder, I wonder, I
wonder, where on earth we are to set up our tabernacle. God
knows;--but I want to know too.

Dearest love, I am very well, and comfortable as I desire to be, in
thy absence. After all, it is a happiness to need thee, to sigh for
thee, to feel the nothingness of all things without thee. But do not
thou think so--thou must be happy always, not independently of thy
husband, but with a bliss equally pervading presence and absence.

Belovedest, I have employed most of my time here in collecting
curiosities, and have so many on my hands that I begin to fear it
will require a volume to contain the catalogue. I would we had such a
museum in reality. And now good-bye, most true Heart. Methinks this is
the longest letter that I have written thee for a great while. Shalt
thou expect me to write during my journey to New York?--or, were it
not better to allow thee to forget me entirely, during that interval
of a week? God bless thee, thou unforgettablest and unforgettingest,

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _New York_, March 4th, 1842

Dearest, I can find only this torn sheet of paper, on which to
scribble thee a bulletin. We are arrived safely; but I am very
homesick for thee--otherwise well and in good spirits. I love thee
infinitely much. Belovedest, I know not whether the Colonel and I will
leave this city on Monday or Tuesday, but if thou hast not already
written, it will be to[o] late to direct a letter hither. In that
case, best wife, write to Albany--whence I shall write to thee. The
steam-engine kept me awake last night; but I cared not, for I was
thinking about thee.

I am exceedingly well.

Dost thou love me?

     Thine ownest

     HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Albany_, March 10th, 1842

Mine own Heart, I arrived here early this morning, by the steamboat;
and thou mayst be well assured that I lost no time in going to the
Post Office; and never did even a letter from thee so thrill my heart
as this. There is no expressing what I feel; and so I will not
try--especially now when I am compelled to write in a bar-room with
people talking and drinking around me. But I love thee a thousand
infinities more than ever.

Most dear, I have come hither to see Mr. O'Sullivan, with whom I have
relations of business as well as friendship, all which thou shalt
know, if thou thinkest them worth enquiring about. The good colonel is
with me; but is going about a hundred miles into the interior,
tomorrow. In the meantime I shall remain here; but thou wilt see me
again on Tuesday evening. How is it possible to wait so long? It is
not possible--yet I have much to talk of with O'Sullivan; and this
will be the longest absence that we shall be compelled to endure,
before the time when thou shalt be the companion of all my journeys.

Truest wife, it is possible that the cars may not arrive in Boston
till late in the evening; but I have good hope to be with thee by six
o'clock, or a little after, on Tuesday. God bless us.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.


     _Salem_, Wednesday, April 5th, 1842

     _My Dear,_

It was thy husband's intention to spend all his leisure time, here at
home, in sketching out a tale; but my spirit demands communion with
thine so earnestly, that I must needs write to thee, if all the
affairs in the world were pressing on me at once. My breast is full of
thee; thou art throbbing throughout all my veins. Never, it seems to
me, did I know what love was, before. And yet I am not satisfied to
let that sentence pass; for it would do wrong to the blissful and holy
time that we have already enjoyed together. But our hearts are
new-created for one another daily, and they enter upon existence with
such up-springing rapture as if nothing had ever existed before--as
if, at this very _now_, the physical and spiritual world were but
first discovered, and by ourselves only. This is Eternity--thus will
every moment of forever-and-ever be the first moment of life, and no
weariness can gather upon us from the past.

It is a bliss which I never wish to enjoy, when I can attain that of
thy presence; but it is nevertheless a fact, that there is a bliss
even in being absent from thee. This yearning that disturbs my very
breath--this earnest stretching out of my soul towards thee--this
voice of my heart, calling for thee out of its depths, and complaining
that thou art not instantly given to it--all these are a joy; for they
make me know how entirely our beings have blended into one another.
After all, these pangs are but symptoms of the completeness of our
spiritual union--the effort of the outward to respond to the inward.
Dearest, I do not express myself clearly on this matter; but what
need?--wilt not thou know better what I mean than words could tell
thee? Dost not thou too rejoice in everything that gives thee a more
vivid consciousness that we are one?--even if it have something like
pain in it. The desire of my soul is to know thee continually, and to
know that thou art mine; and absence, as well as presence, gives me
this knowledge--and as long as I have it, I live. It is, indeed,
impossible for us ever to be really absent from one another; the only
absence, for those who love, is estrangement or forgetfulness--and we
can never know what those words mean. Oh, dear me, my mind writes
nonsense, because it is an insufficient interpreter for my heart.

... Most beloved, I am thinking at this moment of thy dearest nose!
Thou canst not know how infinitely better I know and love Sophie
Hawthorne, since she has yielded up that fortress. And, in requital, I
yield my whole self up to her, and kiss her beloved foot, and
acknowledge her for my queen and liege-lady forever more. Come into my
heart, dearest; for I am about to close my letter. Hitherto, I have
kept thee at arms' length; because the very act of writing necessarily
supposes that thou art apart from me; but now I throw down the pen, in
order that thou mayst be the closer to me.

     Thine ownest Husband,

     NATH. HAWTHORNE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., Monday,

     11 o'clock A.M. [1842]

     _Most dear love,_

I have been caught by a personage who has been in search of me for two
or three days, and shall be compelled to devote this unfortunate
evening to him, instead of to my Dove. Dost thou regret it?--so does
thy poor husband, who loves thee infinitely, and needs thee
continually. Art thou well to-day very dearest? How naughty was I,
last night, to contend against thy magnetic influence, and turn it
against thyself! I will not do so again. My head has been in pain for
thine--at least my heart has. Thou wast very sweet and lovely, last
night--so art thou always.

Belovedest, thou knowest not how I yearn for thee--how I long and pray
for the time when we may be together without disturbance--when absence
shall be a rare exception to our daily life. My heart will blossom
like a rose, when it can be always under thy daily influence--when
the dew of thy love will be falling upon it, every moment.

Most sweet, lest I should not be able to avoid another engagement for
tomorrow evening, I think it best for me to come in the
afternoon--shortly after two o'clock, on Tuesday. Canst thou devote so
much of thy precious day to my unworthiness? Unless I hear from thee,
I shall come. I love thee. I love thee.

Dearest, I kiss thee with my whole spirit.

     Thy husband,

     THEODORE DE L'AUBEPINE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., May 19th [1842]

     _My Ownest_,

Mr. Hillard, this morning, put into my hands the enclosed paragraph
from the Philadelphia Saturday Courier. It is to be hoped that the
penny papers of this city will copy an item of so much public
importance.

Canst thou tell me whether the "Miss Peabody" here mentioned, is Miss
Mary or Miss Elizabeth Peabody?

     THINE OWNEST.

P.S. Please to present my congratulations to the "accomplished Miss
Peabody." But I shall call, this evening, and present them in person.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., May 27th, 1842

     _Dearest Heart_,

Thy letter to my sisters was most beautiful--sweet, gentle, and
magnanimous; such as no angel save my Dove, could have written. If
they do not love thee, it will be because they have no hearts to love
with;--and even if this were the case, I should not despair of thy
planting the seeds of hearts in their bosoms. They will love thee, all
in good time, dearest; and we will be very happy. I am so at this
moment, while my breast heaves with the consciousness of what a
treasure God has given me--in whom I see more to worship, and admire,
and love, every day of my life; and shall see more and more as long as
I live; else, it will be because my own nature retrogrades, instead of
advancing. But thou wilt make me better and better, till I am even
worthy to be thy husband.

Oh, truest wife, what a long widowhood is this! Three evenings without
a glimpse of thee! And I know not whether I am to come at six or
seven o'clock tomorrow evening--or scarcely, indeed, whether I am to
come at all. But, unless thou orderest me to the contrary, I shall
come at seven o'clock.

I met Mr. Emerson at the Athenaeum yesterday. He tells me that our
garden, &c., makes fine progress. Would that we were there. God bless
us.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     No. 13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, June 9th, 1842--Afternoon

     _Dearest wife_,

I love thee beyond all hope of expression--so do thou measure it by
thine own love for me, if indeed thou canst continue to love me, after
our parting. But never did I love thee better than then; and I am even
glad that this vapor of tobacco smoke did, for once, roll thus darkly
and densely between us, because it helps me to hate the practice
forevermore. Thou wast very sweet not to scold me fiercely, for
allowing myself to be so impregnated.

Sweetest, scarcely had I arrived here, when our mother came out of her
chamber, looking better and more cheerful than I have seen her this
some time, and enquired about the health and well-being of my Dove!
Very kindly too. Then was thy husband's heart much lightened; for I
knew that almost every agitating circumstance of her life had hitherto
cost her a fit of sickness; and I knew not but it might be so now.
Foolish me, to doubt that my mother's love would be wise, like all
other genuine love! And foolish again, to have doubted my Dove's
instinct--whom, henceforth--(if never before)--I take for my unerring
guide and counsellor in all matters of the heart and soul. Yet if,
sometimes, I should perversely follow mine own follies, do not thou be
discouraged. I shall always acknowledge thy superior wisdom in the
end; and, I trust, not too late for it to exert its good influence.
Now I am very happy--happier than my naughtiness deserves. It seems
that our mother had seen how things were, a long time ago. At first,
her heart was troubled, because she knew that much of outward as well
as inward fitness was requisite to secure thy foolish husband's peace;
but, gradually and quietly, God has taught her that all is good; and
so, thou dearest wife, we shall have her fullest blessing and
concurrence. My sisters, too, begin to sympathise as they ought; and
all is well. God be praised! I thank Him on my knees, and pray him to
make me worthy of thee, and of the happiness thou bringest me.

Mine ownest, I long for thee, yet bear our separation patiently,
because time and space, and all other finite obstructions, are so fast
flitting away from between us. We can already measure the interval
by days and hours. What bliss!--and what awe is intermingled with
it!--no fear nor doubt, but a holy awe, as when an immortal spirit is
drawing near to the gate of Heaven. I cannot tell what I feel; but
thou knowest it all.

Sweetest, it is my purpose to remain here till Friday, when, unless
thou forbiddest me, I shall be with thee at seven o'clock. God bless
thee! I have no more words, but a heart full of love.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Salem_, June 20th, 1842--A.M. 11 o'clock

     _True and Honorable Wife_,

Thou hast not been out of mind a moment since I saw thee last,--and
never wilt thou be, so long as we exist. Canst thou say as much?
Dearest, dost thou know that there are but ten days more in this
blessed month of June? And dost thou remember what is to happen within
those ten days? Poor little Dove! Now dost thou tremble, and shrink
back, and beginnest to fear that thou hast acted too rashly in this
matter. Now dost thou say to thyself--"Oh, that I could prevail upon
this wretched person to allow me a month or two longer to make up my
mind; for, after all, he is but an acquaintance of yesterday; and
unwise am I, to give up father, mother, and sisters, for the sake of
such a questionable stranger!" Ah, foolish virgin! It is too late;
nothing can part us now; for God Himself hath ordained that we shall
be one. So nothing remains, but to reconcile thyself to thy destiny.
Year by year, thou must come closer and closer to me; and a thousand
ages hence, we shall be only in the honeymoon of our marriage. Poor
little Dove!

Sweetest wife, I cannot write to thee. The time for that species of
communion is past. Hereafter, I cannot write my feelings, but only
external things, business, facts, details, matters which do not relate
to the heart and soul, but merely to our earthly condition. I have
long had such a feeling, whenever I took up my pen--and now more than
ever.

Would that I knew when the priest is to thrust himself between us!
Dearest, the last day of the month, if I mistake not, is Thursday, of
next week. Unless thou desirest my presence sooner, I shall return to
Boston probably on Sunday evening. Then will the days lag heavily,
till we can flee away and be at rest. And, I pray thee, let our flight
be in the morning; for it would be strange and wearisome to live half
a day of ordinary life at such an epoch. I should be like a body
walking about the city without a soul--being therein the reverse of
good old Dr. Harris, whose soul walks about without the body. And this
reminds me, that he has not made himself visible of late. Foolish me,
not to have accosted him; for perhaps he wished to give us some good
advice on our entrance into connubial life--or possibly, he intended
to disclose the hiding-place of some ancient hoard of gold, which
would have freed us forever from all pecuniary cares. I think we shall
not need his counsel on the former point; but on the latter, it would
have been peculiarly acceptable.

Ownest, would there be anything amiss in exchanging that copy of
Southey's Poems for some other book? We should still have Campbell's
English Poets as an immediate keepsake from Miss Burley; and whatever
book we might procure would be none the less a gift from her. My copy
of Southey went to the Manse with my furniture; else I should have
brought it hither and given it to Elizabeth--who, however, does not
especially admire Southey.

Now good bye, dearest love. I fear thou wilt make thyself sick with
much care and toil. God bless thee! Our mother and sisters would send
their love, if they knew that I am writing to thee. They love thee,
and link us together in their thoughts. God bless them, and us, and
everybody. Dost thou perceive how love widens my heart?

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     _Boston_, June 24th.--past 8 o'clock P.M. [1842]

     _Mine ownest_,

I have just received thy letter, and rejoice unspeakably at the news
which thou tellest me. Dearest, thou knowest not how I have yearned
for thee during thy absence; and yet thou didst seem so well and happy
there, that I sent thee a letter, yesterday morning, submitting it to
thy wisdom whether thou hadst not better stay another week. But thou
hast done more wisely to come; for my heart is faint with hunger for
thee. I have been quite sad and dolorous at thy absence. And oh, what
joy to think that henceforth there shall be no long separations for
us. It has taken me so by surprise that I know not what to say upon
the subject; but my heart throbs mightily.

Dearest, thou canst not have a long letter to-night, because thy
husband is weary, and moreover he wants to think about thee, and
embrace thee a thousand million times deep within himself. Art thou
quite well? Most beloved, I beseech [thee] not to agitate thyself in
this removal of the household gods. I shall come on Saturday, but
perhaps not till late. God bless and keep thee.

     Thine ownest, lovingest husband,

     DE L'AUBEPINE.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Salem, Mass.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St., June 27th.
     --7 o'clock P.M. [1842]

     _Most Dear_,

I have just arrived from Salem, and find thy note, in which thou
tellest me of thy illness. Oh, my poor little Dove, thou dost need a
husband with a strong will to take care of thee; and when I have the
charge of thee, thou wilt find thyself under much stricter discipline
than ever before. How couldst thou be so imprudent? Yet I will not
scold thee till thou art quite well. Then thou must look for scoldings
and chastisement too.

Belovedest, I shall not say a single word to induce thee to go through
the ceremony on Monday;--nay I do not know that I will consent to its
taking place then. This we will determine upon tomorrow evening. If
thou art not very well indeed, I shall be afraid to take thee from
under thy mother's care. And, belovedest, do not fear but that I will
bear patiently any necessary delay--and I know that thou wilt
recover as soon as possible, for my sake.

Dearest, God bless thee. Keep thy heart quiet; and tomorrow evening we
will meet in hope and joy.

     THY LOVINGEST HUSBAND.

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MISS PEABODY


     54 Pinckney St.--June 30th.--morning [1842]

     _Dearest Love_,

Thy sister Mary, after I left thee, told me that it was her opinion
that we should not be married for a week longer. I had hoped, as thou
knowest, for an earlier day; but I cannot help feeling that Mary is on
the safe and reasonable side. Shouldst thou feel that this
postponement is advisable, thou wilt find me patient beyond what thou
thinkest me capable of. I will even be happy, if thou wilt only keep
thy mind and heart in peace.

Belovedest, didst thou sleep well, last night? My pillow was haunted
with ghastly dreams, the details whereof have flitted away like
vapors, but a strong impression remains about thy being magnetised.
God save me from any more such! I awoke in an absolute quake. Dearest,
I cannot oppose thy submitting to so much of this influence as will
relieve thy headache; but, as thou lovest me, do not suffer thyself to
be put to sleep. My feeling on this point is so strong, that it
would be wronging us both to conceal it from thee.

My ownest, if it will at all reconcile thee to the ceremony, I will go
to Concord, tomorrow or next day, and see about our affairs there. I
would even go there and live alone, if thou didst bid me though I
shall be much happier in lingering here, and visiting thy couch every
evening, and hearing thee say that thou art better than the night
before.

What a sweet morning is this; it makes me feel bright and hopeful,
after the troubles of the night.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

P.S. I enclose an order for a case of mine, which is to be given to
the baggage-wagoner, when he comes for the furniture. He can present
it, and receive the case.

P.S. 2d. I love thee! I love thee! I love thee.

P.S. 3d. Dost thou love me at all?

     Miss Sophia A. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, March 12th (Saturday), 1843

Own wifie, how dost thou do? I have been in some anxiety about thy
little head, and indeed about the whole of thy little person. Art thou
ill at ease in any mode whatever? I trust that thy dearest soul will
not be quite worn out of thee, with the activity and bustle of thy
present whereabout, so different from the intense quiet of our home.
That poor home! How desolate it is now! Last night, being awake, my
thoughts travelled back to the lonely old house; and it seemed as if I
was wandering up stairs and down stairs all by myself. My fancy was
almost afraid to be there, alone. I could see every object in a sort
of dim, gray light--our bed-chamber--the study, all in confusion--the
parlor, with the fragments of that abortive breakfast on the table,
and the precious silver-forks, and the old bronze image keeping its
solitary stand upon the mantel-piece. Then, methought, the wretched
Pigwigger came and jumped upon the window-sill, and clung there with
her forepaws, mewing dismally for admittance, which I could not grant
her, being there myself only in the spirit. And then came the ghost of
the old Doctor stalking through the gallery, and down the staircase,
and peeping into the parlor; and though I was wide awake, and
conscious of being so many miles from the spot, still it was quite
awful to think of the ghost having sole possession of our home; for I
could not quite separate myself from it, after all. Somehow, the
Doctor and I seemed to be there tete-a-tete, and I wanted thee to
protect me. Why wast not thou there in thought, at the same moment;
and then we should have been conscious of one another, and have had no
fear, and no desolate feeling. I believe I did not have any fantasies
about the ghostly kitchen-maid; but I trust Mary left the flat-irons
within her reach; so that she may do all the ironing while we are
away, and never disturb us more at midnight. I suppose she comes
thither to iron her shroud, and perhaps, likewise, to smooth the
doctor's band. Probably, during her lifetime, she allowed the poor old
gentleman to go to some ordination or other grand clerical celebration
with rumpled linen, and ever since, and throughout all earthly
futurity (at least, so long us the house shall stand) she is doomed
to exercise a nightly toil, with spiritual flat-irons. Poor
sinner--and doubtless Satan heats the irons for her. What nonsense is
all this!--but really, it does make me shiver to think of that poor
house of ours. Glad am I that thou art not there without thy husband.

I found our mother tolerably well; and Louisa, I think, in especial
good condition for her, and Elizabeth comfortable, only not quite
thawed. They speak of thee and me with an evident sense that we are
very happy indeed, and I can see that they are convinced of my having
found the very little wife that God meant for me. I obey thy
injunctions, as well as I can, in my deportment towards them; and
though mild and amiable manners are foreign to my nature, still I get
along pretty well for a new beginner. In short, they seem content with
thy husband, and I am very certain of their respect and affection for
his wife.

Take care of thy little self, I tell thee! I praise heaven for this
snow and "slosh," because it will prevent thee from scampering all
about the city, as otherwise thou wouldst infallibly have done. Lie
abed late--sleep during the day--go to bed seasonably--refuse to see
thy best friend, if either flesh or spirit be sensible of the
slightest repugnance--drive all trouble out of thy mind--and above
all things, think continually what an admirable husband thou hast! So
shalt thou have quiet sleep and happy awaking; and when I fold thee to
my bosom again, thou wilt be such a round, rosy, smiling little dove,
that I shall feel as if I had grasped all cheerfulness and sunshine
within the span of thy waist.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, March 15th, 1843

Dearest wife, Thy letters have all been received; and I know not that
I could have kept myself alive without them; for never was my heart so
hungry and tired as it is now. I need thee continually wherever I am,
and nothing else makes any approach towards satisfying me. Thou hast
the easier part--being drawn out of thyself by society; but with me
there is an ever-present yearning, which nothing outward seems to have
any influence upon. Four whole days must still intervene before we
meet--it is too long--too long--we have not so much time to spare out
of eternity.

As for this Mr. Billings, I wish he would not be so troublesome. I put
a note for him into the Boston Post-Office, directed according to his
own request. His scheme is well enough, and might possibly become
popular; but it has no peculiar advantages with reference to myself;
nor do the subjects of his proposed books particularly suit my fancy,
as themes to write upon. Somebody else will answer his purpose just
as well; and I would rather write books of my own imagining than be
hired to develope the ideas of an engraver; especially as the
pecuniary prospect is not better, nor so good, as it might be
elsewhere. I intend to adhere to my former plan, of writing one or two
mythological story books, to be published under O'Sullivan's auspices
in New York--which is the only place where books can be published,
with a chance of profit. As a matter of courtesy, I may perhaps call
on Mr. Billings, if I have time; but I do not intend to be connected
with this affair.

It is queer news that thou tellest me about the Pioneer. I expected it
to fail in due season, but not quite so soon. Shouldst there be an
opportunity within a day or two, I wish thou wouldst send for any
letters that may be in the Post-Office there; but not unless some
person is going thither, with intent to return before Wednesday next.
If thou receive any, keep them till we meet in Boston.

I dreamed the other night that our house was broken open, and all our
silver stolen. No matter though it be:--we have steel forks and German
silver spoons in plenty, and I only wish that we were to eat our
dinner with them to-day. But we shall have gained nothing on the score
of snow, and slosh, and mud, by our absence; for the bad walking
will be at its very _ne plus ultra_, next week. Wouldst thou not like
to stay just one little fortnight longer in Boston, where the
sidewalks afford dry passage to thy little feet? It will be mid-May,
at least, ere thou wilt find even tolerable walking in Concord. So if
thou wishest to walk while thou canst, we will put off our return a
week longer. Naughty husband that I am! I know by my own heart that
thou pinest for our home, and for the bosom where thou belongest. A
week longer! It is a horrible thought.

We cannot very well afford to buy a surplus stock of paper, just now.
By and by, I should like some, and I suppose there will always be
opportunities to get it cheap at auction. I do wonder--and always
shall wonder, until the matter be reformed--why Providence keeps us so
short of cash. Our earnings are miserably scanty at best; yet, if we
could but get even that pittance, I should continue to be thankful,
though certainly for small favors. The world deserves to come to a
speedy end, if it were for nothing else save to break down the
abominable system of credit--of keeping possession of other people's
property--which renders it impossible for a man to be just and honest,
even if so inclined. It is almost a pity that the comet is
retrograding from the earth; it might do away with all our
perversities at one smash. And thou, my little dove, and thy husband
for thy sake, might be pretty certain of a removal to some sphere
where we should have all our present happiness, and none of these
earthly inconveniences.

Ah, but, for the present, I like this earth better than Paradise
itself. I love thee, thou dearest. It is only when away from thee,
that the chill winds of the world make me shiver. Thou always keepest
me warm, and always wilt; and without thee, I should shiver in Heaven.
Dearest, I think I prefer to write thy name "Mrs. Sophia A.
Hawthorne," rather than "Mrs. Nathaniel Hawthorne";--the latter gives
me an image of myself in petticoats, knitting a stocking. I feel so
sensibly that thou art my chastest, holiest wife--a _woman_ and an
angel. But thou dost not love to blush in the midst of people.

Ownest, expect me next Tuesday in the forenoon; and do not look for
another letter. I pray heaven that I may find thee well, and not tired
quite to death. Even shouldst thou be so, however, I will restore thee
on Wednesday.

     Mrs. Nathaniel Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, Decr. 2d, 1844

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Thy letter came this morning--much needed; for I was feeling desolate
and fragmentary. Thou shouldst not ask me to come to Boston, because I
can hardly resist setting off this minute--and I have no right to
spend money for such luxuries. I think I shall stay here until Bridge
reaches Boston; for he wishes to see me then; and, if he could meet
thee, and baby, and me, it would save him and us the trouble and
perplexity of a visit at Concord. He will probably be in Boston in not
much more or less than a week; and I have written to him to call at
13, West St. When he arrives, let him be told to send for me
forthwith, or do thou write thyself; and I will immediately make my
appearance. Sweetest wife, it goes against my conscience to add
another inhabitant to the immense multitude in thy mother's
caravanserai; nevertheless, methinks I may come there for one night,
and, if I stay longer, remove thence to George Hillard's. But I don't
know. I should like to spend two or three days in Boston, if it could
be done without any derangement of other people or myself; but I
should not feel easy in the caravanserai. Perhaps it would be better
to go at once to George Hillard's. After we get home, we will rest one
another from all toils.

I am very well, dearest, and it seems to me that I am recovering some
of the flesh that I lost, during our long Lent. I do not eat quite
enough to satisfy mother and Louisa; but thou wouldst be perfectly
satisfied, and so am I. My spirits are pretty equable, though there is
a great vacuity caused by thy absence out of my daily life--a
bottomless abyss, into which all minor contentments might be flung
without filling it up. Still, I feel as if our separation were only
apparent--at all events, we are at less than an hour's distance from
one another, and therefore may find it easier to spend a week apart.
The good that I get by remaining here, is a temporary freedom from
that vile burthen which had irked and chafed me so long--that
consciousness of debt, and pecuniary botheration, and the difficulty
of providing even for the day's wants. This trouble does not pursue me
here; and even when we go back, I hope not to feel it nearly so much
as before. Polk's election has certainly brightened our prospects; and
we have a right to expect that our difficulties will vanish, in the
course of a few months.

I long to see our little Una; but she is not yet a vital portion of my
being. I find that her idea merges in thine. I wish for thee; and our
daughter is included in that wish, without being particularly
expressed. She has quite conquered the heart of our mother and
sisters; and I am glad of it, for now they can transfer their interest
from their own sombre lives to her happy one; and so be blest through
her. To confess the truth, she is a dear little thing.

Sweetest Phoebe: I don't intend to stay here more than a week, even if
Bridge should not arrive;--and should there be any reason for our
returning to Concord sooner, thou canst let me know. Otherwise, I
purpose to come to Boston in a week from to-day or tomorrow,--to spend
two or three days there--and then go back to the old Abbey; of which
there is a very dismal picture at present in my imagination, cold,
lonely, and desolate, with untrodden snow along the avenue, and on the
doorsteps. But its heart will be warm, when we are within. If thou
shalt want me sooner, write,--if not so soon, write.

God bless thee, mine ownest. I must close the letter now, because it
is dinner-time; and I shall take it to the Post-Office immediately
after dinner. I spend almost all my afternoons at the Athenaeum. Kiss
our child for me--one kiss for thyself and me together. I love her,
and live in thee.

     THY HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     [December, 1844]

     _Darlingest Phoebe_,

I knew that a letter must come to-day; and it cheered and satisfied
me, as mine did thee. How we love one another! Blessed we! What a blot
I have made of that word "blessed"! But the consciousness of bliss is
as clear as crystal in my heart, though now and then, in great stress
of earthly perplexities, a mist bedims its surface.

Belovedest, it will not be anywise necessary for thee to see Bridge at
all, before I come,--nor then either, if thou preferrest meeting him
in Concord. If I find him resolved to go to Concord, at any rate, I
shall not bring him to see thee in Boston; because, as a lady ought,
thou appearest to best advantage in thine own house. I merely asked
him to call at 13 West-street to learn my whereabout--not to be
introduced to thee. Indeed; I should prefer thy not seeing him till I
come. It was his purpose to be in Boston before this time; but
probably he has remained in Washington to see the opening of Congress,
and perhaps to try whether he can help forward our official
enterprises. Unless he arrive sooner, I purpose to remain here till
Wednesday, and to leave on the evening of that day.

I have not yet called on the Pickmen or the Feet, but solemnly purpose
so to do, before I leave Salem.

Mr. Upham, it is said, has resigned his pastorship. When he returned
from Concord, he told the most pitiable stories about our poverty and
misery; so as almost to make it appear that we were suffering for
food. Everybody that speaks to me seems tacitly to take it for granted
that we are in a very desperate condition, and that a government
office is the only alternative of the almshouse. I care not for the
reputation of being wealthier than I am; but we never have been quite
paupers, and need not have been represented as such.

Now good-bye, mine ownest little wife! I thank God above all things
that thou art my wife--next that Una is our child. I shall come back
to thee with tenfold as much love as ever I felt before. Nobody but we
ever knew what it is to be married. We alone know the bliss and the
mystery; if other people knew it, this dull old earth would have a
perpetual glow round about it.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, December 20th (Friday morning), 1844

     _Sweetest Phoebe_,

It will be a week tomorrow since I left thee; and in all that time, I
have heard nothing of thee, nor thou of me. Nevertheless, I am not
anxious, because I know thou wouldst write to me at once, were
anything amiss. But truly my heart is not a little hungry and thirsty
for thee; so, of my own accord, or rather of my own necessity, I sit
down to write thee a word or two. First of all, I love thee. Also, I
love our little Una--and, I think, with a much more adequate
comprehension of her loveliness, than before we left Concord. She is
partly worthy of being thy daughter;--if not wholly to, it must be her
father's fault.

Mine own, I know not what to say to thee. I feel now as when we clasp
one another in our arms, and are silent.

Our mother and sisters were rejoiced to see me, and not altogether
surprised; for they seem to have had a kind of presentiment of my
return. Mother had wished Louisa to write for us both to come back;
but I think it would not be wise to bring Una here again, till warm
weather. I am not without apprehensions that she will have grown too
tender to bear the atmosphere of our cold and windy old Abbey in
Concord, after becoming acclimated to the milder temperature of thy
father's house. However, we will trust to Providence, and likewise to
a good fire in our guest-chamber. Thou wilt write to me when all
things are propitious for our return. They wish me to stay here till
after Christmas;--which I think is next Wednesday--but I care little
about festivals. My only festival is when I have thee. But I suppose
we shall not get home before the last of next week;--it will not do to
delay our return much longer than that, else we shall be said to have
run away from our creditors.

If I had not known it before, I should have been taught by this long
separation, that the only real life is to be with thee--to be thy
husband--thy intimatest, thy lovingest, thy belovedest--and to share
all things, good or evil, with thee. The days and weeks that I have
spent away from thee are unsubstantial--there is nothing in them--and
yet they have done me good, in making me more conscious of this
truth. Now that I stand a little apart from our Concord life, the
troubles and incommodities look slighter--our happiness more vast and
inestimable. I trust Heaven will not permit us to be greatly pinched
by poverty, during the remainder of our stay there. It would be a pity
to have our recollection of this first home darkened by such
associations,--the home where our love first assumed human life in the
form of our darling child.

I hear nothing yet from O'Sullivan--nor from Bridge. I am afraid the
latter gentleman must be ill; else, methinks, he would certainly have
written; for he has always been a punctual correspondent, when there
was anything to write about.

Ownest Dove, I think I shall not go back to Hillard's. I shall be
ready to go back to Concord whenever thou art; but, not having the
opportunity to consult thee, I now propose that we settle our return
for Saturday, a week from tomorrow. Should anything prevent thee from
going then (for instance, the want of a girl) I may go and pay our
debts, as far as in my power, and then return. But this need not be
anticipated. There is no absolute necessity--(except in our hearts,
which cannot endure to be away from one another much longer)--for our
being at home before the first of January; but if all things are
convenient, we will not delay longer than Saturday. Oh, what sweet,
sweet times we will have.

Give Una a kiss, and her father's blessing. She is very famous here in
Salem.

     THY HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, April 14th (Sunday), 1844

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Thy letter reached me yesterday forenoon, and made me truly
happy--happier than I can tell. I do not think that I am the more
conscious of the baby, by standing aloof from her. She has not yet
sufficiently realised herself in my soul; it seems like a dream,
therefore, which needs such assurances as thy letter, to convince me
that it is more than a dream. Well; I cannot write about her--nor
about thee, belovedest, for whom I have at this moment an unutterable
yearning. Methinks my hand was never so out of keeping with my heart.

I called at the book room in Boston, and saw there thy mother, thy
brother Nat, and Elizabeth!!--besides two or three ladies. It was the
most awkward place in the world to talk about Una and other kindred
subjects; so I made my escape as soon as possible, promising to return
to dine if convenient, and resolving that it should be as
inconvenient as possible. I wish thy mother could be so inhospitable
as never to ask me--but at all events, I need never go, except when
thou art there. I went to George Hillard's office, and he spoke with
unmitigable resolution of the necessity of my going to dine with
Longfellow before returning to Concord; but I have an almost
miraculous power of escaping from necessities of this kind. Destiny
itself has often been worsted in the attempt to get me out to dinner.
Possibly, however, I may go. Afterwards I called on Colonel Hall, who
held me long in talk about politics and other sweetmeats. Here,
likewise, I refused one or two invitations to dinner. Then I stept
into a book-auction, not to buy, but merely to observe; and after a
few moments, who should come in, with a smile as sweet as sugar
(though savoring rather of molasses) but, to my horror and
petrifaction, Mr. Watterson! I anticipated a great deal of bore and
botheration; but, through Heaven's mercy, he merely spoke a few words,
and then left me. This is so unlike his deportment in times past, that
I suspect the Celestial Railroad must have given him a pique; and if
so, I shall feel as if Providence had sufficiently rewarded me for
that pious labor.

In the course of the forenoon, I encountered Mr. Howes in the street.
He looked most exceedingly depressed, and pressing my hand with
peculiar emphasis, said that he was in great affliction, having just
had news of his son George's death in Cuba. He seemed encompassed and
overwhelmed by the misfortune, and walked the street as in a heavy
cloud of his own grief, forth from which he extended his hand to meet
my grasp. I expressed my sympathy, which I told him I was now the more
capable of feeling in a father's suffering, as being myself the father
of a little girl--and, indeed, the being a parent does give one the
freedom of a wider range of sorrow as well as happiness. He again
pressed my hand, and left me.

Well, dove, when I got to Salem, there was great joy, as you may
suppose. Our mother and sisters take as much interest in little Una as
can possibly be desired. They think the lock of hair very beautiful,
and deny that it has the faintest tinge of red. Mother hinted an
apprehension that poor baby would be spoilt--whereupon I irreverently
observed, that having spoilt her own three children, it was natural
for her to suppose that all other parents would do the same; when she
knocked me into a cocked hat, by averring that it was impossible to
spoil such children as Elizabeth and me, because she had never been
able to do anything with us. This I believe to be very true. There was
too much gentleness in her nature for such a task. She remonstrates,
by the by, against Una's being carried about in anybody's arms, and
says that it will soon be impossible to keep her quiet in any other
way. This was the case with Elizabeth; and mother never allowed her
other children to become habituated to it.

I could scarcely convince them that Una has begun to smile so soon. It
surprised even mother; though her own children appear to have been
bright specimens of babyhood. Elizabeth could walk and talk at nine
months old. I do not understand that thy husband was quite such a
miracle of precocity, but should think it not improbable, inasmuch as
precocious boys are said to make stupid men.

Ownest wife, I long so much to get back to thee, that it is a mockery
to try to say how much. Yet I think I shall be benefitted by the
absence, though it be truly an unpalatable medicine. I hope thy father
will be able to stay till Friday. It is just possible, if I go out to
see Longfellow, that I may not come till Saturday night; but this
will depend partly on what day the steamer comes. I shall consult thy
mother about the necessity of thy father's presence in Boston earlier
than that.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Concord, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, May 27th, 1844

     _Dearest Phoebe_,

I cannot let the day pass without speaking a little word to thee, to
tell thee how strange the old Abbey seems without thy presence, and
how strange this life, when thou art away. Nevertheless, I truly
rejoice in thy absence, as hoping it will do good to thy dearest
brain, which has been over-wrought, as well as thy physical frame. And
how does our belovedest little Una? whom I love more than I ever told
thee, though not more than thou knowest--for is she not thine and
mine, the symbol of the one true union in the world, and of our love
in Paradise.

Dearest, my cook does his office admirably. He prepared what I must
acknowledge to be the best dish of fried fish and potatoes for dinner
to-day, that I ever tasted in this house. I scarcely recognized the
fish of our own river. I make him get all the dinners while I confine
myself to the much lighter labors of breakfast and tea. He also
takes his turn at washing the dishes. Ellery Channing came to see me
this morning, and was very gracious and sociable; and we went a
fishing together. He says his little girl weighed seven pounds at her
birth, and is doing very well. Miss Prescott is now there.

We had a very pleasant dinner at Longfellow's; and I liked Mrs.
Longlady (as thou naughtily nicknamest her) quite much. The dinner was
late, and we sate long; so that Conolly and I did not get here till
half-past nine o'clock--and truly the old house seemed somewhat dark
and desolate. The next morning came George Prescott with Una's lion,
who greeted me very affectionately, but whined and moaned as if he
missed somebody who should have been here. I am not quite as strict as
I should be in keeping him out of the house; but I commiserate him and
myself--for are we not both of us bereaved. Still I am happy, and more
quiet than when thou wast here; because I feel it to be good for thee
to be there. Dearest, keep thyself at peace, and do not let persons
nor things trouble thee; and let other people take all the care of Una
that is possible; and do not fear to go out occasionally; and think
sometimes of thy husband, who loves thee unspeakably; and because he
cannot tell its immensity, he may as well stop here, especially as
Conolly (whom I can no more keep from smoking than I could the kitchen
chimney) has just come into the study with a cigar, which might
perfume this letter, and make thee think it came from thy husband's
own enormity.

I love thee. I love thee.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, May 29th, 1844

     _Ownest Wife_,

Conolly is leaving me, to my unspeakable relief; for he has had a bad
cold, which caused him to be much more troublesome, and less amusing,
than might otherwise have been the case. Thy husband is in perfect
health; and as happy in the prospect of being alone, as he would be in
anything, except to be reunited to thee. I suppose I must invite Mr.
Farley to come by-and-by; but not quite yet--Oh, not quite yet--it is
so sweet to be alone. I want to draw a little free breath. Ah, why
canst not thou be with me here--and no Mary--no nobody else! But our
little Una! Should not she be of the party? Yes; we have linked a
third spirit forever to our own; and there is no existing without her.

Dearest Phoebe, I do trust thou art well and at ease. Thou absolutely
knowest not how I love thee. God bless thee, mine ownest--God bless
our daughter--God bless thy husband--God bless us altogether, and the
whole world too.

I write in the greatest hurry.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

Have no apprehensions on my account. I shall write to Farley at the
end of the week--and till then shall bathe myself in solitude.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, May 31st, 1844

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Thy two dearest letters have been received, and gave me infinite
comfort. Oh, keep thyself quiet, best wife, and do not think of coming
home till thou art quite cured, even though Una should grow to be
quite a large girl in the interim. As for me, I get along admirably,
and am at this moment superintending the corned beef, which has been
on the fire, as it appears to me, ever since the beginning of time,
and shows no symptom of being done before the crack of doom. Mrs. Hale
says it must boil till it becomes tender; and so it shall, if I can
find wood to keep the fire a-going. Meantime, I keep my station in the
dining-room, and read or write as composedly as in my own study. Just
now, there came a very important rap to the front door; and I threw
down a smoked herring which I had begun to eat (as there is no hope of
the corned beef to-day) and went to admit the visitor. Who should it
be but Ben, with a very peculiar and mysterious grin upon his face! He
put into my hands a missive directed to "Mr. and Mrs. Hawthorne"; it
contained a little hit of card signifying that "Dr. Lemuel Fuller and
Miss Catherine Barrett receive their friends Thursday Eve, June 6th,
at 8 o'clock." I am afraid I shall be too busy washing my dishes, to
pay many visits during thy absence. This washing of dishes does seem
to me the most absurd and unsatisfactory business that I ever
undertook. If, when once washed, they would remain clean forever and
ever, (which they ought in all reason to do, considering how much
trouble it is,) there would be less occasion to grumble; but no sooner
is it done, than it requires to be done again. On the whole I have
come to the resolution not to use more than one dish at each meal.
However, I moralise deeply on this and other matters, and have
discovered that all the trouble and affliction in the world arises
from the necessity of cleansing away our earthly pollutions.

I ate the last morsel of bread, yesterday, and congratulated myself on
being now reduced to the fag-end of necessity. Nothing worse can
happen (according to ordinary modes of thinking) than to want bread;
but, like most afflictions, it is worse in prospect than reality. I
found one cracker in the tureen, and exulted over it as if it had been
so much gold. However, I have sent a petition to Mrs. Prescott,
stating my destitute condition, and imploring her succor; and till it
arrives, I shall keep myself alive on smoked herrings and apples,
together with part of a pint of milk, which I share with Leo. He is my
great trouble now, though an excellent companion too. But it is not
easy to find food for him, unless I give him what is fit for
Christians--though, for that matter, he appears to be as good a
Christian as most laymen, or even as some of the clergy. I fried some
pouts and eels, yesterday, on purpose for him; for he does not like
raw fish. They were very good; but I should hardly have taken the
trouble on my own account.

George Prescott has just come to say, that Mrs. Prescott has no bread
at present, and is gone away this afternoon, but that she will send me
some tomorrow. I mean to have a regular supply from the same
source--which thou shalt repay after thy return.

I go to bed at dusk, now-a-days, out of a tender consideration for the
oil-can, which does not possess the peculiar virtues of the Widow
Cruse's. [sic] Oh, dear little wife! Dost thou even think of me? I
think of thee continually, and of our darling Una, and long to see
both thee and her, yet not with an impatient and importunate longing.
I am too sure of my treasures not to be able to bear a little
separation of them, when it is for thine own good. Thou needest be
under no uneasiness for my sake. Everything goes on well, and I enjoy
my solitude, next to thy society. I suppose I shall write to Mr.
Farley tomorrow, but it would content me well to be quite alone till
thy return. Thou canst not imagine how much the presence of Leo
relieves the feeling of perfect loneliness. He insists upon being in
the room with me all the time, (except at night, when he sleeps in the
shed) and I do not find myself severe enough to drive him out. He
accompanies me, likewise, on all my walks, to the village and
elsewhere; and, in short, keeps at my heels all the time, except when
I go down cellar. Then he stands at the head of the stairs and howls,
as if he never expected to see me again. He is evidently impressed
with the present solitude of our old Abbey, both on his own account
and mine, and feels that he may assume a greater degree of intimacy
than would be otherwise allowable. He will easily be brought within
the old regulations, after thy return.

Ownest, I have written to-day, because I thought thou wouldst be
anxious to know what sort of a life I lead, now that my guest has
departed. Thou wilt see that I am fit to be trusted in my own keeping.
No ghost has haunted me, and no living thing has harmed me. God bless
thee and our little Una. I say to myself, when I feel lonely, "I am a
husband!--I am a father!"--and it makes me so happy!

     THINE OWNEST.

P.S.--Three o'clock.--The beef is done!!!

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, June 2d, 1844. 12 o'clock

     _Mine ownest_,

Thy letter was brought this morning by one of the Fullers--which, I
know not--but it was the young man who called on us last winter; and
he promises to call and take this. Sweetest, if it troubles thee to
write, thou must not make the attempt. Perhaps it is not good for thy
head; and thy mother can just say a word or two, to let me know that
all is going on well. Oh, keep thyself quiet, dearest wife, and let
not thy brain be whirled round in the vortex of thy present
whereabout; else I must have thee back again as soon as possible. But
if it be for thy good, I can spare thee at least a month longer;
indeed, thou must not come till the Doctor has both found out thy
disorder and cured it.

Everything goes on well with thy husband. Thou knowest, at the time of
writing my last letter, I was without bread. Well, just at supper
time came Mrs. Brown with a large covered dish, which proved to
contain a quantity of special good slap jacks, piping hot, prepared, I
suppose, by the fair hands of Miss Martha or Miss Abby; for Mrs.
Prescott was not at home. They served me both for supper and
breakfast; and I thanked Providence and the young ladies, and compared
myself to the prophet fed by ravens--though the simile does rather
more than justice to myself, and not enough to the generous donors of
the slap jacks. The next morning, Mrs. Prescott herself brought two
big loaves of bread, which will last me a week, unless I have some
guests to provide for. I have likewise found a hoard of crackers in
one of the covered dishes; so that the old castle is sufficiently
provisioned to stand a long siege. The cornbeef is exquisitely done,
and as tender as a young lady's heart, all owing to my skilful
cookery; for I consulted Mrs. Hale at every step; and precisely
followed her directions. To say the truth, I look upon it as such a
masterpiece in its way, that it seems irreverential to eat it; so
perhaps thou wilt find it almost entire at thy return. Things on which
so much thought and labor are bestowed should surely be immortal.

Ellery Channing intends to make a tour presently. Wm. Fuller says he
is at variance with Miss Prescott--or at least is uncomfortable in the
house with her. What a gump! I have had some idea of inviting him to
stay here till thy return; but really, on better consideration, the
experiment would be too hazardous. If he cannot keep from quarrelling
with his wife's nurse, he would surely quarrel with me, alone in an
empty house; and perhaps the result might be a permanent breach. On
the whole, he is but little better than an idiot. He should have been
whipt often and soundly in his boyhood; and as he escaped such
wholesome discipline then, it might be well to bestow it now. But
somebody else may take him in hand; it is none of my business.

Leo and I attended divine services, this morning, in a temple not made
with hands. We went to the farthest extremity of Peter's path, and
there lay together under an oak, on the verge of the broad meadow.
Dearest Phoebe, thou shouldst have been there. Thy head would have
been quite restored by the delicious air, which was too good and pure
for anybody but thee to breathe. Shouldst thou not walk out, every
day, round the common, at least, if not further? Thou must not fear to
leave Una occasionally. I shall not love her, if she imprisons thee
when thy health requires thee to be abroad. Do not people offer to
take thee to ride?

I doubt whether Mr. Bradford could be comfortable here, unless there
were womankind in the house to keep it in better order than it suits
my convenience to do. A man of his nice conscience would be shocked, I
suppose, if the whole house were not swept, every day, from top to
bottom, or if the dishes of several meals were suffered to accumulate,
in order to save trouble by a general cleansing. Now such enormities
do not at all disturb my composure. Besides, I find myself such good
company, and the hours flit so rapidly away, that I have no time to
bestow on anybody else. Talk is but a waste of time. When I cannot be
with thee, mine ownest--my true life--then let me be alone. I wrote to
Mr. Farley, yesterday; and am sorry for it, since I received thy
letter. But I presume there is no prospect of his coming; and should
he do so, I shall not hesitate to advise him to go away, if our mode
of life here should seem unsuitable to his condition.

Darlingest wife, when thou writest next, tell me if thou canst see the
termination of thy absence; but do not think it in the least necessary
to hurry on my account. I find I have shirts enough for a fortnight or
three weeks longer; and can get somebody to wash them, at the end of
that time. Do not hurry thyself--do not be uneasy. I had rather come
and see thee in Boston, than that thou shouldst return too soon.

Give my blessing to our daughter.

     THY LOVINGEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.

     By Mr. Fuller.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, June 6th, 1844

Mine ownest, ownest love, dost thou not want to hear from thy husband?
There is no telling nor thinking how much I love thee; so we will
leave all that matter without another word. Dearest, Mr. Farley
arrived yesterday, and appeared to be in most excellent health, and as
happy as the sunshine. Almost the first thing he did was to wash the
dishes; and he is really indefatigable in the kitchen; so that thy
husband is quite a gentleman of leisure. Previous to his coming, I had
kindled no fire for four entire days, and had lived all that time on
the corned beef--except one day, when Ellery and I went down the river
on a fishing excursion. Yesterday we boiled some lamb, which we shall
have cold for dinner to-day. This morning, Mr. Farley fried a
sumptuous dish of eels for breakfast, and he avows his determination
to make me look fat before thy return. Mrs. Prescott continues to be
the instrument of Providence, and yesterday sent us a very nice
plum-pudding. Thou seest, therefore, that domestic matters are going
on admirably. I have told Mr. Farley that I shall be engaged in the
forenoons, and he is to arrange his own occupations and amusements
during that time. Thus, as everything is so comfortably regulated,
thou canst stay in Boston without the slightest solicitude about my
welfare, as long as there is any object in being near Dr. Wesselhoeft.
But how our hearts will rush together, when we meet again! Oh, how I
love thee!

Not much has happened of late. Leo, I regret to say, has fallen under
suspicion of a very grave crime--nothing less than murder--a fowl
crime it may well be called--for it is the slaughter of one of Mr.
Hayward's hens. He has been seen to chase the hens, several times, and
the other day one of them was found dead. Possibly he may be innocent;
and as there is nothing but circumstantial evidence, it must be left
with his own conscience. Meantime, Mr. Hayward or somebody else seems
to have given him such a whipping, that he is absolutely stiff, and
walks about like a rheumatic old gentleman. I am afraid, too, that he
is an incorrigible thief. Ellery Channing says he saw him coming up
the avenue with a whole calf's head in his mouth. How he came by it,
is best known to Leo himself. If he were a dog of fair character, it
would be no more than charity to conclude that he had either bought it
or had it given to him; but, with the other charges against him, it
inclines me to great distrust of his moral principles. Be that as it
may, he managed his stock of provisions very thriftily--burying it in
the earth, and eating a portion of it whenever he felt an appetite. If
he insists upon living by highway robbery, dost thou not think it
would be well to make him share his booty with us? Our butcher's bill
might thus be considerably lessened.

Miss Barret came a day or two ago to enquire whether I thought my wife
would be willing to lend our astral lamp for the great occasion of
this evening. Thou seest, she has a very proper idea of the authority
of the wife, and cannot imagine that I should venture to lend any
article without reference to thy wishes. As she pledged herself, if
there were any damages, to "make it good," I took the liberty to put
the lamp into her hands. Thou knowest its trick of going out in the
middle of the evening; and it will be a truly laughable and melancholy
mishap, if it should suddenly leave them in darkness, at the most
critical moment. Methinks it would be no favorable omen for the
prosperity of the marriage. Miss Catherine regrets very much that
thou art not to be here, this evening. I wonder thou dost not come on
purpose. By the by, it was not our old broken astral lamp, but the
solar lamp that I lent her.

Ownest wife, am I really a father?--the father of thy child! Sometimes
the thought comes to me with such a mighty wonder that I cannot take
it in. I love our little Una a great deal better than when I saw her
last; and all the love that grows within me for her, is so much added
to the infinite store of my love for thee. Ah, dost thou think of
me?--dost thou yearn for me?--does thy breast heave and thy heart
quake with love for thy husband?--... (portion of letter missing) I
can hardly breathe for loving thee so much.

Dearest, Mr. Farley is to carry this letter to the Post-Office this
morning, and perhaps he will find a line or two from thee. If so, I
shall be happy; and if not, then too I shall be glad that thou hast
not tasked thy dearest little head to do any pen-work.

     THY BELOVEDEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Concord_, June 10th, 1844

     _Only Belovedest_,

Thy letter came yesterday; and I suppose thou didst get mine about the
same time. Dearest, I take it for granted that thou hast concluded to
await the arrival of the money from O'Sullivan; so that I shall not
expect thee till Friday or Saturday. I think it is an excellent plan
to have thy mother come with thee; so pray ask her immediately, if
thou hast not done it already. I shall not be able to send away Mr.
Farley before thou comest; but he will go on Monday.

Mr. Farley is in perfect health, and absolutely in the seventh Heaven;
and he talks, and talks, and talks, and talks; and I listen, and
listen, and listen, with a patience for which (in spite of all my
sins) I firmly expect to be admitted to the mansions of the blessed.
And there is really a contentment in being able to make the poor,
world-worn, hopeless, half-crazy man so entirely comfortable as he
seems to be here. He is an admirable cook. We had some roast veal and
a baked rice pudding on Sunday--really a fine dinner, and cooked in
better style than Mary can equal; and George Curtis came to dine with
us. Like all male cooks, he is rather expensive, and has a tendency to
the consumption of eggs in his various concoctions, which thou wouldst
be apt to oppose. However, we consume so much fish of our own
catching, that there is no great violation of economy upon the whole.
I have had my dreams of splendor, but never expected to arrive at the
dignity of keeping a man-cook. At first, we had three meals a day, but
now only two.

We dined at Mr. Emerson's the other day, in company with Mr. Hedge.
Mr. Bradford has been to see us two or three times. And, speaking of
him, do thou be most careful never to say a word in depreciation of
Sarah Stearns, in his presence. Both of us (horrible to say!) have
fallen into this misfortune, on former occasions. Mr. Farley has given
me most unlooked for intelligence in regard to him and her. He looks
thinner than ever--judge, then, how thin he must be--his face is so
thin, and his nose is so sharp, that he might make a pen with it; and
I wish he would make me a better one than I am now writing with. He
is particularly melancholy, and last Saturday, when we were alone on
the river together, seemed half-inclined to tell me the why and
wherefore. But I desire no such secrets. Keep this to thy little self.

I love thee, I love thee! Thou lovest me, thou lovest me! Oh, I shiver
again to think how much I love thee--how much we love, and that thou
art soon, soon, coming back to thine own home--to thine ownest
husband; and with our beloved baby in thine arms. Shall I know little
Una, dost thou think?

Now good bye, sweetest wife. It will be no more than decent for me to
go down and offer my assistance to Mr. Farley in some of the minor
preparations of dinner. Thy mother must put her skill in exercise;
else he will find a sad falling-off in our living, after thy return. I
shall look for thee partly on Friday, but shall not be disappointed if
thou comest not till Saturday. God bless thee, thou belovedest.

     THINE OWN HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Boston_, May 23d, 1845

     _Ownest Dearest_,

I write this little note in order to warn thee in due season that I
shall not be at home till Monday. Hillard has made an engagement for
me with Longfellow for Sunday; so that, without disappointing both of
those worthies exceedingly, I cannot come away sooner. Belovedest, I
love thee a million times as much every hour that I stay away from
thee; and my heart swells toward thee like a mighty flood. Also, I
have a yearning for our little Una; and whenever I go, and with
whomsoever I am talking, the thought of thee and her is ever present
with me. God bless thee! What a happy home we have. That is the
knowledge that I gain by staying away from thee.

I saw thy mother this forenoon. She told me that Elizabeth had gone to
Concord this morning.

Remember me to "Our Boarder."

     In utmost haste,
     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Concord, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, August 25th, 1845

     _Dearest Phoebe Hawthorne_,

Already an age has elapsed since I parted from thee, mine own life;
although, according to human measurement, it is but about twenty-seven
hours. How I love thee, wife of my bosom! There is no telling; so
judge it by what is in thine own deepest and widest little heart.

Sweetest, what became of that letter? Whose fault was it, that it was
left behind? I was almost afraid to present myself before thy mother
without it. Nevertheless, the Count and I made it our first business
to call at 13 West-street, where we found Madame Peabody (I will call
her so to please my Dove) in the book room alone. She seemed quite as
well as usual, and regretted, I believe, that she had not gone to
Concord--and so did thy husband; but thou needest not say so to the
good old gentleman who sits looking at the outside of this letter,
while thou art reading the inside. I gave her all the information I
could about thy condition--being somewhat restrained, however, by the
presence of O'Sullivan.

Taking leave of thy mother, I went with the Count to Mr. Bancroft's
door, and then parted with him, with some partial expectation of
meeting him again at dinner. Then I looked in at the Athenaeum
reading-room, and next went to George Hillard's office. Who should I
find here but Longfellow, and with him Mr. Green, the Roman consul,
whom, as thou knowest, it was Bridge's plan to eject from office for
thy husband's benefit. He has returned to this country on a visit.
Never didst thou see such an insignificant looking personage (or
person rather;) and it surprised me so much the more, for I had formed
a high idea of his intellectual incarnation from a bust by Crawford,
at Longfellow's rooms. Longfellow himself seems to have bloomed forth
and found solidity and substance since his marriage;--never did I
behold a man of happier aspect; although I know one of happier
fortunes incomparably. But Longfellow appears perfectly satisfied, and
to be no more conscious of any earthly or spiritual trouble than a
sunflower is--of which lovely blossom he, I know not why, reminded me.
Hillard looked better than I have ever before seen him, and was in
high spirits on account of the success of his oration. It seems to
have had truly triumphant success--superior to that of any Phi Beta
Kappa oration ever delivered. It gladdened me most to see this
melancholy shadow of a man for once bathed and even pervaded with a
sunshine; and I must doubt whether any literary success of my own ever
gave me so much pleasure. Outward triumphs are necessary to him; to
thy husband they are anything but essential.

From Hillard's I went to see Colonel Hall, and had a talk about
politics and official matters; and the good Colonel invited me to
dinner; and I concluded to accept, inasmuch as, by dining with the
Count, I should have been forced to encounter Brownson--from whom the
Lord deliver us. These are the main incidents of the day; but I did
not leave Boston till half past five, by which time I was quite
wearied with the clatter and confusion of the city, so unlike our
quiet brooding life at home. Oh, dear little Dove, thou shouldst have
been with me; and then all the quiet would have been with me likewise.

Great was the surprise and joy of Louisa when she found me at the
door. I found them all pretty well; but our poor mother seems to have
grown older and thinner since I saw her at last. They all inquired
for thee with loving kindness. Louisa intended to come and visit us in
about a week; and I shall not thwart her purpose, if it still
continue. She thinks she may be ready in a week from to-day. And,
dearest little wife, I fear that thy husband will have to defer his
return to thy blessed arms till the same day. Longfellow wants me to
dine with him on Friday; and my mother will not be content to give me
up before Thursday; and indeed it is not altogether unreasonable that
she should have me this long; because she will not see me again.

But, sweetest Phoebe, thou knowest not how I yearn for thee. Never
hadst thou such love, as now. Oh, dearest wife, take utmost care of
thyself; for if any harm should come to thee during my absence, I
should always impute blame to myself. Do watch over my Dove, now that
I am away. And should my presence be needful before Saturday, I will
fly to thee at a moment's warning. If all continue well, I shall
proceed to Boston on Thursday, visit Longfellow on Friday, and come
home (Oh, happiest thought!) on Saturday night, with Louisa, if she
finds it possible to come. If anything should detain her, it will be
our mother's health. God bless thee. Amen.

Afternoon.--What a scrawl is the foregoing! I wrote fast because I
loved fervently. I shall write once more before my return. Take care
of thy dearest little self and do not get weary.

     THY BEST OF HUSBANDS.

     Mrs. Nathaniel Hawthorne,
     Concord, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, Novr. 10th, 1845

     _Ownest_,

It was revealed to me that thou didst write on Saturday, and so, at
nightfall, I went to the Post-Office, but found no letter. This
morning, it has arrived, with the postmark of to-day. It gladdens me
to hear of Una's joy, and of thy being with people whom thou knowest
well, and who know thee well, and with whom thou canst have real
intercourse and sympathy. As for us in Castle Dismal, we miss thee
greatly, all of us, and dwell in a deeper shadow for lack of thee, and
that streak of living sunshine with which thou hast illuminated the
earth. Whom do I mean by this brilliant simile? Can it be that little
redheaded personage? Louisa complains of the silence of the house; and
not all their innumerable cats avail to comfort them in the least. Thy
husband thinks of thee when he ought to be scribbling nonsense--and
very empty and worthless is his daily life, without thee.
Nevertheless, if thou art at ease, do not come home in less than a
week. I feel as if it were good for thee to be there, and good for Una
too. Louisa told me, yesterday, with some alarm in her manner, that
Dr. Moss (thy medical friend) says that the illness from vaccination
does not come on, or does not reach its crisis, till the ninth day.
Can this be so? And will it be necessary to wait so long? That would
postpone thy return till the middle of next week--a term to which I
cannot yet reconcile myself.

I read Una's note, addressed to "Madame Hawthorne," then sealed it up
and threw it downstairs. Doubtless, they find it a most interesting
communication; and I feel a little shamefaced about meeting them.

I hear nothing from Washington as yet; nor, indeed, is it yet time to
expect any definite intelligence. Meanwhile Pike and thy friend David
are planning to buy us an estate, and build a house, and have even
gone so far as to mark out the ground-plot of the house, in chalk, on
David's hearth. I fear it will prove a castle in the air; and yet, a
moderate smile of Providence would cause it to spring out of the
earth, on that beautiful hillside, like a flower in the summer time.
With a cottage of our own, and the surveyorship, how happy we might
be!--happier than in Concord, on many accounts. The Surveyorship I
think we shall have; but the cottage implies an extra thousand or
fifteen hundred dollars.

I have heard of Mr. Atherton's being in Boston since thy
departure;--whether Mrs. Atherton is with him I know not. Governor
Fairfield, I understand, starts for Washington to-day.

God bless thee, dearest!--and blessed be our daughter, whom I love
next to thee! Again, if thou feelest it good for thee, on any account,
to stay longer in Boston, do not hasten home;--but whenever thou
comest, my heart will open to take thee in.

     THY LOVINGEST HUSBAND.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Castle Dismal_, Novr. 13th, 1845

     _Intimatest Friend_,

I cannot settle down to work this forenoon, or do anything but write
to thee--nor even that, I fear, with any good effect; for I am just as
much dissatisfied with this mode of intercourse as always hitherto. It
is a wretched mockery. But then it _is_ a semblance of communication,
and, thus far, better than nothing.

I got thy letter of Tuesday the same evening, while it was still warm
out of thy heart; and it seemed to fill the air round about me with
Nona's prattle. I do love her--that is the truth,--and almost feel it
a pity to lose a single day of her development;--only thou wilt tell
me, by letter or by mouth, all the pretty things that she says or
does, and more over find a beauty in them which would escape my
grosser perception. Thus, on the whole, I shall be a gainer by our
occasional separations. Thee I miss, and without any recompense. I
marvel how it is that some husbands spend years and years away from
their wives, and then come home with perhaps a bag or two of gold,
earned by the sacrifice of all that life. Even poverty is better--and
in saying that, thou knowest how much I say.

Nothing has happened here since I wrote thee last. I suspect the
intelligence of thy meditated baby is very pleasant to the grandmother
and aunts; for Louisa met me at dinner, that day, with unusual
cheerfulness, and observed that Thanksgiving was at hand, and that we
must think of preparing. [As] for me, I already love the future little
personage; and yet, somehow or other, I feel a jealousy of him or her,
on Una's account, and should not choose to have the new baby better
than the old one. So take care what thou dost, Phoebe Hawthorne! And
now I think of it, do not thou venture into that tremendous press and
squeeze, which always takes place on landing from the ferry-boat at
the East Boston depot. Thou art not to be trusted in such a tumult; it
will be far better to wait behind, and compel the conductor to find
thee a seat. There is always the densest squeeze on Saturdays.

But I shall not expect thee back on Saturday. According to Dr.
Wesselhoeft's dictum, and supposing the vaccination to have taken,
that will be precisely the critical day;--if Dr. Moss be correct, the
crisis comes on Monday. In either case, I hope thou wilt wait a
little. There is the greatest satisfaction to me in thinking how
comfortably situated thou art, with thy sister at thy elbow, and thy
mother at arms' length, and thy Aesculapius within a five minutes'
summons. If I (and thou too, thou lovingest one) could endure it, I
should be glad that thou mightest spend the winter there; but that is
too heart-chilling to think of--so thou must even come back, in a few
days more, to old Castle Dismal! But I shall never feel at home here
with thee. I went, the other afternoon, to look at the hill where Pike
and the Chancellor have built a castle in the air for our reception.
Thou hast no idea what capacities it has.

(Portion of letter missing)




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, Jany. 19th, 1846.--Tuesday

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

The shoe arrived last evening; but on what evidence thou dost so
confidently accuse me of putting it into the trunk, I cannot imagine.
Thou positively didst put it there thyself. I saw thee!

Dearest, if any money comes from New York by to-day's mail, I will
come to Boston on Thursday morning, to escort thee home. Otherwise, I
really do not think I ought. Heaven knows, I desire it; but as it is
not necessary for thy safety, and as we are so miserably poor,
methinks the dollar should be reserved for indispensables. I did hope
the New York money would have come to hand before now. Providence must
take our matters in hand very speedily.

I hope, Phoebe, thou hast not engaged to pay Winifred's passage,
either to or from Boston. She told Mrs. Dromedary that she should not
have gone with thee, only that her passage would be paid. She has a
cousin living at the Essex House in this city; and the Dromedary
thinks she is partly engaged to go there herself. This is the secret
of her willingness to remain in Salem. Dotish as she appeared, she has
wit enough to be fair and false, like all her countryfolk. It will be
well to investigate this matter before thou returnest; and, if she
really means to leave us, perhaps thou hadst better engage a new girl
in Boston forthwith.

Poor little Una's back--my heart bleeds for it. Do not come back till
it is well, nor till thou thyself hast undergone thorough repairs,
even though thou shouldst be compelled to hire a lodging.

Ownest, be careful not to slip down. Thou art prudent in behalf of
other people, but hast little caution on thine own account. In going
to the cars do not get entangled in that great rush of people who
throng out of the ferry-boat. Remain behind, and Heaven will find thee
a seat. Would thou wast safe home again, eating thy potatoes, and
glancing sideways at me with thy look of patient resignation. Never
did I miss thee so much as during this separation. But for the idea of
thee, my existence would be as cold and wintry as the weather is now,
and with a cloudy gloom besides, instead of the dazzling sunshine. I
was driven to play cards with Louisa, last evening!

God bless thee! I have nothing more to say, that can be said.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, April 24th, 1846.--6 P.M.

     _Ownest dearest_,

I have this moment received the packet and thy letter, and cannot
tolerate that thou shouldst not have a word from thy husband tomorrow
morning. Truly, Castle Dismal has seemed darker than ever, since I
returned to it;--and not only to me, but to its other inmates. Louisa
spoke of the awful stillness of the house, and said she could not bear
to give Una's old shoes to that little Lines child, and was going to
keep them herself. I rejoiced her much, by telling her of Una's
home-sickness.

Fees were tolerably good, yesterday and to-day; and I doubt we shall
have enough to live on, during thy continuance in Boston--for which
let us be thankful.

Bridge came to see me this afternoon, and says Mary Pray has consented
to come to thee; and by this time, I hope, thou hast her. Thou canst
not think what a peace I enjoy in the consideration that thou art
within reach of Dr. Wesselhoeft. It is by my feelings as to thee and
Una, more than on my own account, that I find I am a true believer in
homeopathy.

Ownest, I love thee. I love little Una dearly too. Tell her so, and
show her the place, and give her a kiss for me.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     [_Salem_, March 15th, 1847]

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Above is the note. I will not say how much beyond all money I feel
indebted to Mr. Shaw for his kindness. It relieves my spirits from a
great burthen, and now I feel calm and very happy.

I love thee infinitely, and need thee constantly. I long to hear Una's
voice. I find that I even love Bundlebreech!!!

Ellery and I have a very pleasant time, and take immense walks every
afternoon, and sit up talking till midnight. He eats like an Anaconda.
Thou didst never see such an appetite.

Thou dost not tell me when thou wilt turn thy face homeward. Shouldst
thou stay till next week, I will come and escort thee home. Ellery, I
suppose, will go as soon as Saturday. (I shall need some money to
come with. Couldst thou send me ten dollars?) In haste, in depths of
love.

     THY HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, March 20th, 1847.--Saturday

     _Ownest Wife_,

Thy letter of Thursday did not reach me till this morning. Ellery goes
to-day--much to my satisfaction, though we have had a good time. Thou
dost not know how much I long to see thee and our children. I never
felt anything like it before--it is too much to write about.

I do not think I can come on Monday before 10 Â½, arriving in Boston at
about 11. It is no matter about the session at Johnson's; and if thou
choosest to give him notice, so be it.

Now that the days are so long, would it not do to leave Boston, on our
return, at Â½ past 4?

Kiss Una for me--likewise Bundlebreech.

     THY HUSBAND.

P.S. Of course, my coming on Monday must be contingent on reasonably
pleasant weather.

I shall probably go to Johnson's immediately after my arrival--before
coming to West-street. I hope he will be otherwise engaged.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, July 13th, 1847

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Greatly needed by me were thy two letters; for thou hadst never before
been away from me so long without writing. And thou art still busy,
every moment! I was in hopes thou wouldst have a little quiet now,
with Dora to take care of the children;--but that seems fated never
more to be thine. As for me, I sink down into bottomless depths of
quiet:--never was such a quiet life as mine is, in this voiceless
house. Thank God, there are echoes of voices in my heart, else I
should die of this marble silence. Yet I am happy, and, dearest
Phoebe, I wish that thou, likewise, couldst now and then stand apart
from thy lot, in the same manner, and behold how fair it is. I think
we are very happy--a truth that is not always so evident to me, until
I step aside from our daily life. How I love thee!--how I love our
children! Can it be that we are really parents!--that two beautiful
lives have gushed out of our life! I am now most sensible of the
wonder, and the mystery, and the happiness.

Sweetest wife, I have nothing to tell thee. My life goes on as
regularly as our kitchen clock. It has no events, and therefore can
have no history.

Well; when our children--these two, and three or four more are grown
up, and married off, thou wilt have a little leisure, and mayst paint
that Grecian picture that used to haunt thy fancy. But then our
grandchildren--Una's children, and Bundlebreech's,--will be coming
upon the stage. In short, after a woman has become a mother, she may
find rest in Heaven, but nowhere else.

This pen is so horrible that it impedes my thought. I cannot write any
more with it. Dearest, stay as long as it is good for the children and
thyself. I have great joy in thinking how good it has been for Una to
have this change. When thou comest back to me, it will be as the
coming of an angel, and with a cherub in each hand. Indeed, it does
not require absence and distance to make an angel of thee; but the
divine qualities of the children do become somewhat more apparent, by
occasionally getting beyond the reach of their clamor.

I think I had better not come on Saturday; but if thou wilt tell me
the day of thy return, I will come in the afternoon, and escort thee
back. Poor little Una! How will she bear to be caged up here again.
Give her a kiss for me, and tell her I want to see her _very much_. I
have been much affected by a little shoe of hers, which I found on the
floor. Does Bundlebreech walk yet?

     THINEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, Oct. 7th, 1847

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Thy letter has just come. I knew the day would not pass over without
one. Would that my love could transform this ugly east wind into the
sweet south-west--then wouldst thou be full of pleasant air and
sunshine. I want to be near thee, and rest thee.

Dearest, the things all arrived safe--not having suffered even the
dollar's worth of damage to which the man restricted himself. The
carpet shall not be put down till thou comest. There is no need of it,
except to save thee the trouble. We are in hopes of getting an elderly
woman (Hannah Lord, whom I think thou hast heard of) for a handmaiden,
but this is not so certain as I could wish. Our mother and Louisa
repugn at the idea of an Irish girl; and there are scarcely any others
to be heard of. I should not wonder, after all, if we had to seek
one in Boston. The usual price here is $1.25. I trust we shall be
provided by the time thou art ready to come; but if otherwise, Mrs.
Campbell is now well, and can officiate for a few days.

Duyckinck writes me that the African Cruise has come to a second
edition. It is also to be published in a cheaper style, as one of the
numbers of a District School Library.

The weather is so bad that I hope thou wilt not have gone to Horn pond
to-day. How different these east winds are from anything that we felt
in Concord. Nevertheless, I feel relieved at having left that place of
many anxieties, and believe that we shall pass a happy winter here.
All that I need is to have shelter, and clothes, and daily bread, for
thee and Una, without the anguish of debt pressing upon me
continually;--and then I would not change places with the most
fortunate person in the world. What a foolish sentence that is! As if
I would change places, in our worst estate, either with man or angel.

Phoebe, I think I had better not come for thee till Monday, as the
weather is so unpropitious for thy visits. If that be too soon, tell
me; for thou hadst better calculate on not seeing Boston again for
some months; and, that being the case, it will be advisable to act
as if thou wast going to make a voyage to Europe.

I find I shall love thee as thou never wast loved before. God bless
our little Una. She is our daughter! What a miracle! I love mother and
child so much that I can put nothing into words.

I think I shall be diligent with my pen, in this old chamber whence so
many foolish stories have gone forth to the world. I have already
begun to scribble something for Wiley & Putnam.

     THINE OWNEST OWN HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     Surveyor's Office, _Salem_, May 5th, 1848

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

I am altogether in favor of getting the six chairs; as to the glass, I
know not what to think. In fact, I must leave all other articles to
thy judgment, and shall be satisfied, whatever thou dost. We can
dispense with the glass better than with anything else. I rather covet
the large marble-top table; but perhaps the repairs would make it
otherwise than cheap.

Una behaves (as thou wouldst affirm) like an angel. We rode out to
Lynn, yesterday afternoon, and had a long walk--much to her delight. I
bathed her this morning; and I believe she has not shown the slightest
wilfulness or waywardness, since thy departure. We have very loving
times together.

I had a great mind to come to Boston, yesterday, with Una, instead
of alighting at Lynn. I felt thy magnetism drawing me thither.

     THINE OWNEST.

If thou canst get me a book or two, I shall be glad. Kiss old
Bundlebreech, and ask him if he remembers me. If thou art very
desirous of it, thou mayst stay till Monday--or, indeed, a week or two
longer--or ten years, if thou thinkest proper. I seem already to have
been solitary at least so long.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     Surveyor's Office, [_Salem_,] June 19th, 1848

     _Only Belovedest_,

I received thy letter on Saturday evening, and was more refreshed by
it than if it had been a draft of ice-water--a rather inapt
comparison, by the way. Thou canst have no imagination how lonely our
house is. The rooms seem twice as large as before--and so awfully
quiet! I wish, sometime or other, thou wouldst let me take the two
children and go away for a few days, and thou remain behind.
Otherwise, thou canst have no idea of what it is. I really am half
afraid to be alone, and feel shy about looking across the dimly
moon-lighted chamber. I expend a great deal of sentiment as often as I
chance to see any garment of thine, in my rambles about the house, or
any of the children's playthings. And after all, there is a strange
bliss in being made sensible of the happiness of my customary life,
by this blank interval.

Tell my little daughter Una that her dolly, since her departure, has
been blooming like a rose--such an intense bloom, indeed, that I
rather suspected her of making free with the brandy-bottle. On taxing
her with it, however, she showed no signs of guilt or confusion; and I
trust it was owing merely to the hot weather. The color has now
subsided into quite a moderate tint, and she looks splendidly at a
proper distance; though, on too close inspection, her skin appears
rather coarse--not altogether unlike that of thy good Aunt B. She has
contracted an unfortunate habit of squinting; and her mouth, I am
sorry to say, is somewhat askew. I shall take her to task on these
matters, and hope to produce a reformation. Should I fail, thou must
take her in hand. Give Una a kiss, and tell her I love her dearly. The
same to little Bundlebreech, who has probably forgot "faver" by this
time.

Dora complains terribly of lonesomeness, and so does Aunty N. In
short, we are pretty forlorn. Nevertheless, I have much joy in your
all being in the country, and hope thou wilt stay as long as thou
feelest it to be for the best. How I love the children!--how I love
thee, best of wives!--and how I shall make thee feel it, when thou
comest home! Dost thou love me?

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Newton, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, June 27th, 1848

Dearest Phoebe, when I saw thy thick letter, last night, I could not
imagine what might be its contents, unless thou hadst sent a large
package of the precious roses, which I should have kissed with great
reverence and devotion. Thou wast naughty not to do it. But the letter
truly refreshed my heart's thirst; and Una's also were very
delightful. What a queer epistle was that which she dictated! It
seemed as if she were writing from Paradise to comfort me on earth.

Dearest, I long for thee as thou dost for me. My love has increased
infinitely since the last time we were separated. I can hardly bear to
think of thy staying away yet weeks longer. I think of thee all the
time. The other night, I dreamed that I was at Newton, in a room with
thee, and with several other people; and thou tookst occasion to
announce, that thou hadst now ceased to be my wife, and hadst taken
another husband. Thou madest this intelligence known with such
perfect composure and _sang froid_--not particularly addressing me,
but the company generally--that it benumbed my thoughts and feelings,
so that I had nothing to say. Thou wast perfectly decided, and I had
only to submit without a word. But, hereupon, thy sister Elizabeth,
who was likewise present, informed the company, that, in this state of
affairs, having ceased to be thy husband, I of course became hers; and
turning to me, very coolly inquired whether she or I should write to
inform my mother of the new arrangement! How the children were to be
divided, I know not. I only know that my heart suddenly broke loose,
and I began to expostulate with thee in an infinite agony, in the
midst of which I awoke; but the sense of unspeakable injury and
outrage hung about me for a long time--and even yet it has not quite
departed. Thou shouldst not behave so, when thou comest to me in
dreams.

I had a letter from Bridge, yesterday, dated in the latter part of
April. He seems to be having a very pleasant time with his wife; but I
do not understand that she is, as the Germans say, "of good hope." In
the beginning of the letter, he says that Mrs. Bridge will return to
America this summer. In another part, he says that the ship in which
he is will probably return late in the autumn; but he rather wishes
that it may [be] delayed till Spring, because Mrs. Bridge desires to
spend the winter in Italy.

Oh, Phoebe, I want thee much. My bosom needs thy head upon it,--thou
alone art essential. Thou art the only person in the world that ever
was necessary to me. Other people have occasionally been more or less
agreeable; but I think I was always more at ease alone than in
anybody's company, till I knew thee. And now I am only myself when
thou art within my reach. Thou art an unspeakably beloved woman. How
couldst thou inflict such frozen agony upon me, in that dream! Thou
shouldst have caressed me and embraced me.

But do not think, much as I want thee, that I wish thee to come as
long as thou judgest it good for the children to be away, and as long
as thou thinkest we can afford the expense. We have a pervading
happiness, that goes on whether we are present or absent in the body.
Their happiness depends upon time and place; and the difference to
them between town and country must be almost that of a cage or the
free air, to the birds. And then it is so much better for their
health.

Hast thou remembered to ask Mrs. Mann whether little Pick Mann was
named out of pure gratitude and respect for the old refugee Colonel,
or whether there was not a little earthly alloy--an idea of gilding an
ugly name with a rich legacy?

Ownest, if I write any more, it would be only to try to express more
lovings, and longings--and as they are impossible to express, I may as
well close.

     My only belovedest,
     THY BEST BELOVED.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     West Newton.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, July 1st, 1848

Ownest, How long is it since I heard from thee--and what an eternity
since thou didst go away! It seems at least as long as the whole time
that we have been married. My heart calls for thee, very loudly, and
thou comest not. And I want to hear our children's voices;--it would
be pleasant, even, to see little Tornado in one of her tantrums. She
is a noble child. Kiss her and Bundlebreech for me, and talk to them
about me, lest I be entirely forgotten.

If this had been a pleasant day, I should probably have gone to New
York on Custom-House business; but it being thick and dismal, I shall
give up the expedition, although it would have been a very favorable
opportunity. I should have been back here on Wednesday morning; and as
one of the intervening days is Sunday, and another the Fourth of
July, only a single day of attendance at my office would have been
lost. Best of all, it would have cost nothing.

Dora has a great deal of work to do; but she neglects nothing
appertaining to my comfort. Aunty 'Ouisa has favored me with one cup
of coffee, since thou wentest away, and with an occasional doughnut;
but I think thy lectures on diet and regimen have produced a
considerable effect.

Dearest, is thy absence so nearly over that we can now see light
glimmering at the end of it? Is it half over? If not, I really do not
see how I am to bear it. A month of non-existence is the utmost
limit----

I am continually interrupted as I write, this being pay-day, and a
very busy time. I don't know exactly what will be the amount of our
fees; but I should think it would be about as good a month as the
last. Thirty-five dollars, however, have already been drawn for our
quarter's rent. If thou wantest any more money, as probably thou dost,
write me how much, and I will send it. How much must I reserve to pay
Rebecca's wages? Any surplus, I intend to apply in lessening Millet's
bill.

Here comes somebody else.

     Ownest wife,

I am the best, and truest, and lovingest husband that ever was,
because thy goodness makes me so.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     West Newton, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Surveyor's Office_, July 5th, 1848

Unspeakably belovedest, thy letter has just been handed me, and I
snatch a moment from much press of business to say a word to thee. It
has made my heart heave like the sea, it is so tender and sweet. Ah,
thou hast my whole soul. There is no thinking how much I love thee;
and how blessed thy love makes me. I wonder how thou canst love me.

Thy letter was also most comfortable to me, because it gives such a
picture of thy life there with the children. It seemed as if I could
see the whole family of my heart before my eyes, and could hear you
all talking together. I began to be quite uneasy about little
Bundlebreech's indisposition, until thy latest intelligence reassured
me. Yet I shall be anxious to hear again.

Dora could not come to Boston yesterday, to meet Rebecca, because she
has an infinity of work, and moreover, yesterday morning, she had to
go to bed with the tooth-ache.

I went to Boston to see the fireworks, and got home between 11 & 12
o'clock, last evening. I went into the little room to put on my linen
coat; and, on my return into the sitting room, behold! a stranger
there--whom dost thou think it might be?--it was Elizabeth! I did not
wish to risk frightening her away by anything like an exhibition of
wonder; and so we greeted one another kindly and cordially, but with
no more _empressement_ than if we were constantly in the habit of
meeting. It being so late, and I so tired, we did not have much talk
then; but she said she meant to go to walk this afternoon, and asked
me to go with her--which I promised to do. Perhaps she will now make
it her habit to come down and see us occasionally in the evening.

Oh, my love, my heart calls for thee so, that I know not how to wait
weeks longer for thee. Yet I would not that thou shouldst deprive the
children of the beautiful country on that account. All will be repaid
us in the first hour of meeting.

Own wife, the coat does not crock the shirtsleeve in the least--so thy
labor in lining it would have been thrown away. I gave the vest to
Louisa soon after thou wentest away, and have seen nothing of it
since.

I wish Una, and Julian too, would write a letter to Aunty 'Ouisa. I
know it would give her as much pleasure as anything can.

     With infinite love,

     I am THINE OWNEST.

Naughtiest, I do not leave thy letter about. I would just as soon
leave my own heart on the "walking side," as Una calls it.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     West Newton.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, July 7th, 1848

Ownest, when thy letters come, I always feel as if I could not have
done without them a moment longer. Thou must have received one from me
since the date of thine, but I hope it will not weary thee to receive
this brief scribblement. If my hand would only answer to my heart,
what letters I should write thee! It is wonderful--the growth of our
love! Six years ago, it seemed infinite; yet what was the love of that
epoch to the present! Thou badest me burn two pages of thy last
letter; but I cannot do it, and will not; for never was a wife's deep,
warm, chaste love so well expressed, and it is as holy to me as the
Bible. Oh, I cannot begin to tell how I love thee.

Dearest, I should not forgive myself if I were to deprive the children
of the country. Thou must keep them there as long as thou canst. When
thou hast paid thy visit to Sarah Clark, I must come and see thee in
Boston, and if possible (and if I shall be welcome) will spend a
Sunday there with thee.

There is no news. Miss Derby has finished her picture, and it is now
being publicly exhibited. I have not yet seen it, but mean to go.

Mr. Pike is going to dine with me to-day, on green peas.

Oh, for one kiss!

     THY LOVINGEST HUSBAND.

Did Julian have a tooth?--or what was the matter? Why did all the
children have fever-fits? Why was Horace jumped in a wet sheet?

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, July 12th, 1848

Dearest Phoebe, I enclose an advertisement of silks. Aunty 'Ouisa
would like to have you get some patterns of those which she has marked
with a pencil.

A letter from Mrs. F. Shaw came for thee to-day; and I opened and read
it. It contains nothing that requires thy immediate perusal; and as it
is rather bulky, I do not send it. She is well, and so is Caroline
Sturgis.

I hear great accounts of the canary birds, now exhibiting in Boston;
and it seems to me thou mightest please Una very much by taking her to
see them.

I need thee very much indeed, and shall heartily thank God when thou
comest back to thine own home--and thine ownest husband. What a
wretched time thou art having on that infernal mattress----Truly do I
pity thee, cooped up in that hot and dusty house, such a day as this.
Were it not for Dr. Wesselhoeft, I should think it best for thee to
get away immediately.

Did Una remember me, when she waked up?--and has little Bundlebreech
wanted me?--and dost thou thyself think of me with moderate kindness?
Oh, Phoebe, it is too great a sacrifice--this whole blank month in our
wedded life. I want thee always.

     THY LOVINGEST SPOUSE.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, July 18th, 1848

Belovedest, thy letter came yesterday, and caused my heart to heave
like an ocean. Thou writest with a pen of celestial fire;--none ever
wrote such letters but thou--none is worthy to read them but I--and I
only because thou purifiest and exaltest me by thy love. Angels, I
doubt not, are well pleased to look over thy shoulder as thou writest.
I verily believe that no mortals, save ourselves, have ever known what
enjoyment was. How wonderful that to the pure in spirit all earthly
bliss is given in a measure which the voluptuary never can have
dreamed of.

Soon--soon--thou wilt be at home. What joy! I count the days, and
almost the hours, already. There is one good in our separation--that
it has enabled us to estimate whereabouts we are, and what vast
progress we have made into the ever-extending infinite of love.
Wherefore, this will not be a blank space, but a bright one, in our
recollection.

Dearest, I told Louisa of thy wish that she should come on Saturday;
and it seemed that the proposal found favor in her eyes. If not, she
will perhaps commission thee to buy her a gown.

Elizabeth came down to see me last evening, and we confabulated till
eleven o'clock.

Dora is dying to see thee and the children. The fortune teller has
foretold that she is not to marry poor Mr. Hooper, nor anybody else
that has been hitherto in question; but a young man, who, Dora says,
lives in Boston. She has thorough faith in the prediction.

I forgot to take those two volumes of Cooper's Miles Wallingford; and
when I was last in Boston, I looked for them on the shelf in vain. If
they may conveniently be had, when thou comest home, wilt thou please
to give thyself the trouble of taking them.

Kiss our beloved children for me.

Thou art coming home!--Thou art coming home!

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Castle Dismal_, Novr. 18th, 1848

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

Thy letter did not come till to-day; and I know not that I was ever
more disappointed and impatient--for I was sure that it ought to have
come yesterday, and went to the Post Office three times after it. Now
I have nothing to tell thee, belovedest wife, but write thee just a
word, because I must. Thou growest more and more absolutely essential
to me, every day we live. I never knew how thou art intertwined with
my being, till this absence.

Darlingest, thou hast mentioned Horace's sickness two or three times,
and I have speculated somewhat thereupon. Thou hast removed to
West-street, likewise, and reservest the reasons till we meet. I
wonder whether there be any connection between these two matters. But
I do not feel anxious. If I am not of a hopeful nature, at least my
imagination is not suggestive of evil. If Una were to have the
hooping-cough, I should be glad thou wast within Dr. Wesselhoeft's
sphere.

What a shadowy day is this! While this weather lasts, thou canst not
come.

     THY BELOVEDEST HUSBAND.

Do not hasten home on my account--stay as long as thou deemest good. I
well know how thy heart is tugging thee hitherward.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     14 Mull street, Monday, [_Salem_,] 16th April, 1849

     _Ownest wife_,

I suppose thou wilt not expect (nor wish for) a letter from me; but it
is so desolate and lonesome here that I needs must write. This is a
miserable time. Thy and the children's absence; and this dreary
bluster of the wind, which at once exasperates and depresses me to the
very last degree; and finally, a breakfast (the repetition of
yesterday's) of pease and Indian pudding!! It is a strange miscellany
of grievances; but it does my business--it makes me curse my day. This
matter of the breakfast is the most intolerable, just at this moment;
because the taste of it is still in my mouth, and the nausea and
disgust overwhelms me like the consciousness of sin. Hell is nothing
else but eating pease and baked Indian pudding! If thou lovest me,
never let me see either of them again. Keep such things for thy and my
worst enemies. Give thy husband bread, or cold potatoes; and he
never will complain--but pease and Indian pudding! God forgive me for
ever having burthened my conscience with such abominations. They are
the Unpardonable Sin and the Intolerable Punishment, in one and the
same accursed spoonfull!

I think I hardly ever had such a dismal time as yesterday. I cannot
bear the loneliness of the house. I need the sunshine of the children;
even their little quarrels and naughtinesses would be a blessing to
me. I need thee, above all, and find myself, at every absence, so much
the less able to endure it. Come home come home!

Where dost thou think I was on Saturday afternoon? Thou wilt never
guess.

In haste; for it is almost Custom House time.

     THY HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     13 West Street,
     Boston, Mass.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, May 9th, 1849

     _Dearest_,

Thy letter was received last night. What a time thou hast!--and I not
there to help thee! I almost feel as if I ought to come every day; but
then I should do so little good--arriving at 4 o'clock; and the
children going to bed at six or seven; and the expense is so
considerable. If thou canst hold out till Friday, I shall endeavor to
come in the afternoon and stay till Monday. But this must depend on
arrangements hereafter to be made; so do not absolutely expect me
before Saturday. Oh that Providence would bring all of you home,
before then! This is a miserable time for me; more so than for thee,
with all thy toil, and watchfulness and weariness. These sunless days
are as sunless within as without. Thou hast no conception how
melancholy our house can be. It absolutely chills my heart.

If it is necessary for me to come sooner, write by express. Give my
love to Una and Julian, and tell them how much I miss them. God bless
thee and them.

     THINE OWNEST.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. N. Peabody,
     13 West-street,
     Boston.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Navy Yard_, April 26th, 1850

     _Ownest wife_,

Thy letter (dated 22d, but postmarked this very day) has just arrived,
and perplexed me exceedingly with its strange aspect. Thy poor dear
thumb! I am afraid it puts thee to unspeakable pain and trouble, and I
feel as if I ought to be with thee; especially as Una is not well.
What is the matter?--anything except her mouth? I almost wish thou
hadst told me to come back.

It rained so continually on the day of my departure that I was not
able to get over to the Navy Yard, but had to put up at the Rockingham
House. Being recognized there, I was immediately lugged into society,
whether I would or no; taking tea at one place, and spending the
evening at another. I have since dined out, and been invited to a
party--but escaped this latter infliction. Bridge's house, however, is
the quietest place imaginable, and I only wish thou couldst be here,
until our Lenox home is ready. I long to see thee, and am sad for want
of thee. And thou too so comfortless in all that turmoil and
confusion!

I have been waiting for thee to write; else I should have written
before, though with nothing to say to thee--save the unimportant fact
that I love thee better than ever before, and that I cannot be at
peace away from thee. Why has not Dr. Wesselhoeft cured thy thumb?
Thou never must hereafter do any work whatever; thou wast not made
strong, and always sufferest tenfold the value of thy activities. Thou
didst much amiss, to marry a husband who cannot keep thee like a lady,
as Bridge does his wife, and as I should so delight to keep thee,
doing only beautiful things, and reposing in luxurious chairs, and
with servants to go and to come. Thou hast a hard lot in life; and so
have I that witness it, and can do little or nothing to help thee.
Again I wish that thou hadst told me to come back; or, at least,
whether I should come or no. Four days more will bring us to the first
of May, which is next Wednesday; and it was my purpose to return then.
Thou wilt get this letter, I suppose, tomorrow morning, and, if
desirable, might send to me by express the same day; and I could
leave here on Monday morning. On looking at the Pathfinder Guide, I
find that a train leaves Portsmouth for Boston at 5 o'clock P.M.
Shouldst thou send me a message by the 11 o'clock train, I might
return and be with thee tomorrow (Saturday) evening, before 8 o'clock.
I should come without being recalled; only that it seems a sin to add
another human being to the multitudinous chaos of that house.

I cannot write. Thou hast our home and all our interests about thee,
and away from thee there is only emptiness--so what have I to write
about?

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.

P.S. If thou sendest for me to-morrow, and I do not come, thou must
conclude that the express did not reach me.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Care of Dr. Nathl. Peabody,
     Boston, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Lenox_, July 30th, 1851

     _Dearest Phoebe_,

We are getting along perfectly well, and without a single event that
could make a figure in a letter. I keep a regular chronicle of all our
doings; and you may read it on your return. Julian seems perfectly
happy, but sometimes talks in rather a sentimental style about his
mother. I do hope thou camest safely to West Newton, and meetest with
no great incommodities there. Julian is now out in the garden; this
being the first time since thou wentest away, almost, (except when he
was in bed) that he has left me for five minutes together. I find him
really quite a tolerable little man!

Kiss Una for me, and believe me,

     Thy affectionate husband,

     N. H.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     West Newton.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Lenox_, August 1st, Friday [1851]

     _Dearest Phoebe_,

I send the tools, which I found in one of the cupboards. Thy two
letters arrived together, this morning. I was at the P. O. on
Wednesday, and greatly disappointed to find nothing.

Julian and I get along together in great harmony, & as happy as we can
be severed from thee. It grieves me that thou findest nobody to help
thee there. If this state of things is to continue, thou must abridge
thy stay, and return before thou art quite worn out.

I wrote a few lines on Tuesday (I think) which I suppose thou hast
received. I more than ever abhor letter-writing; but thou partly
knowest that I am

     Thy lovingest

     HUSBAND.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     West Newton.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Lenox_, August 7th, 1851.--Thursday

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

I rec'd thy letter yesterday. I will be in Pittsfield on _Thursday_
next (a week from to-day) and will escort thee home.

I have written quite a small volume of Julian's daily life and mine;
so that, on thy return, thou wilt know everything that we have done
and suffered;--as to enjoyment, I don't remember to have had any,
during thy absence. It has been all doing and suffering.

Thou sayest nothing whatever of Una.

Unless I receive further notice from thee I shall consider Thursday
the day. I shall go at any rate, I think, rain or shine; but of
course, thou wilt not start in a settled rain. In that case, I shall
come again to Pittsfield, the next day. But, if fair weather, I hope
nothing will detain thee; or if it necessarily must, and thou has[t]
previous knowledge of it, thou canst write me.

Julian is perfectly well. We both, according to our respective
capacities, long for thee.

     Thinest,

     N. H.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Lenox_, August 8th, 1851

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

I wrote thee a note yesterday, and sent it to the village by
Cornelius; but as he may have neglected to put it in, I write again.
If thou wilt start from West Newton on _Thursday_ next, I will meet
thee at Pittsfield, which will answer the same purpose as if I came
all the way.

Mrs. Tappan requests that thou wilt bring ten pounds of ground rice
for her; or a less quantity, if thou hast not room for so much.

Julian is very well, and keeps himself happy from morning till night.
I hope Una does the same. Give my love to her.

I shall be most gladdest to see thee.

     Thine,

     N. H.

August 9th.--Saturday.--I recd. yesterday thy note, in which thou
speakest of deferring thy return some days longer. Stay by all means
as long as may be needful. Julian gets along perfectly well; and I am
eager for thy coming only because it is unpleasant to remain torn
asunder. Thou wilt write to tell me finally what day thou decidest
upon;--but unless I hear from thee, I shall go to Pittsfield on
_Saturday_, a week from to-day. But if thou seest reason for staying
longer do so, that nothing may be left at loose ends.

Julian and I had a fine ride yesterday with Herman Melville and two
other gentlemen.

Mrs. Peters is perfectly angelic.

     Thinest,

     N. H.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _West Newton_, Septr. 19th, 1851

     _Dearest Phoebe_,

Here I am as thou seest; and if not here, I know not where I could be;
for Boston is so full that the Mayor has issued proclamation for the
inhabitants to throw open their doors. The President is there.

They all appear to be well here; and thy mother, if Horace and Georgia
say truly, walked three miles yesterday. I went with Mary to see her,
last evening, and found her much better than I ever hoped.

Talking with Mary, last night, I explained our troubles to her, and
our wish to get away from Lenox, and she renewed the old proposition
about our taking this house for the winter. The great objection to it,
when first talked of, was, that we, or I, did not wish to have the
care and responsibility of your father and mother. That is now
removed. It strikes me as one of those unexpected, but easy and
natural solutions wherewith Providence occasionally unknots a
seemingly inextricable difficulty. If you agree with me, you had
better notify Mr. or Mrs. Sedgwick that we shall not want the Kemble
house. We can remain in the red house till we come here.

We shall pay a rent, but I know not as yet precisely what. But we
shall probably only remain half the time Mr. and Mrs. Mann are in
Washington.

Mary will write.

I shall probably go to Salem on Saturday. Kiss and spank the children.

     Thine ownest in haste,

     N. H.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Lenox, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Salem_, Sept. 23d, 1851

     _Dearest_,

I have just received thy two letters; they having been forwarded
hither by Ticknor & Co. I wish thou hadst not had the head-ache; it
gives me the heart-ache.

In regard to the rent, it is much to pay; but thou art to remember
that we take the house only till we can get another; and that we shall
not probably have to pay more than half, at most, of the $350. It does
seem to me better to go; for we shall never be comfortable in Lenox
again. Ticknor & Co. promise the most liberal advances of money,
should we need it, towards buying the house.

I will tell thee my adventures when I come. I am to return to Boston
to-night, and fully intend to be in Lenox by Saturday night.

     In hugest haste,

     THINE OWNEST.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Lenox, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Portsmouth_, Sept. 3d, 1852

     _Ownest Phoebe_,

I left Brunswick Wednesday night, and arrived here yesterday, with
Pierce. My adventures thou shalt know when I return, and how I was
celebrated by orators and poets--and how, by the grace of Divine
Providence, I was not present, to be put to the blush. All my
contemporaries have grown the funniest old men in the world. Am I a
funny old man?

I am going to cross over to the Isle of Shoals, this forenoon, and
intend to spend several days there, until I get saturated with
sea-breezes.

I love thee very much-est;--likewise, the children are very pleasant
to think of. Kiss Una--Kiss Julian--Kiss Rosebud--for me! Kiss
thyself, if thou canst--and I wish thou wouldst kiss me.

A boat passes between Portsmouth and the Isle of Shoals, every
forenoon; and a letter, I presume, would reach me in case of
necessity.

I long to see thee. It is breakfast time.

     Thine ownest

     N. HAWTHORNE.

     Mrs. Sophia A. Hawthorne,
     Concord, Massachusetts.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _New York_, Sunday morng., April 17th, 1853

     _Dearest_,

I arrived here in good condition Thursday night at Â½ past 12. Every
moment of my time has been so taken up with calls and engagements that
I really could not put pen to paper until now, when I am writing
before going down to breakfast.

It is almost as difficult to see O'Sullivan here as if he were a
hundred miles off. I rode three miles to his home on Friday, and found
him not at home. However, he came yesterday, and we talked together
until other people came between.

I do wish I could be let alone, to follow my own ideas of what is
agreeable. To-day, I am to dine with a college-professor of
mathematics, to meet Miss Lynch!! Why did I ever leave thee, my own
dearest wife? Now, thou seest, I am to be lynched.

We have an ugly storm here to-day. I intend to leave New York for
Philadelphia tomorrow, and shall probably reach Washington on
Wednesday.

I am homesick for thee. The children, too, seem very good and
beautiful. I hope Una will be very kind and sweet. As for Julian, let
Ellen make him a pandowdy. Does Rosebud still remember me? It seems an
age since I left home.

No words can tell how I love thee. I will write again as soon as
possible.

     THINE OWNEST HUSBAND.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Philadelphia_, Tuesday 19th, 1853

     _Ownest_,

We left New York yesterday at 3 o'clock, and arrived safely here,
where we have spent the day. We leave for Washington tomorrow morning,
and I shall mail this scribble there, so that thou wilt know that I
have arrived in good condition. Thou canst not imagine the difficulty
of finding time and place to write a word. I enjoy the journey and
seeing new places, but need thee beyond all possibility of telling. I
feel as if I had just begun to know that there is nothing else for me
but thou. The children, too, I know how to love, at last. Kiss them
all for me. In greatest haste (and in a public room),

     Thine ownest,

     N. H.

Baltimore, Wednesday, 5 o'clock.--Thus far in safety. I shall mail the
letter immediately on reaching Washington, where we expect to be at
Â½ past 9.

With love a thousand times more than ever,

     Thinest,

     N. H.

Washington, Thursday.--Before Breakfast.

--Dearest, I arrived so late and tired, last night, that I quite
forgot to mail the letter. I found about a dozen letters awaiting me
at the hotel, from other people, but none from thee. My heart is weary
with longing for thee. I want thee in my arms.

I shall go to the President at nine o'clock this morning--shall spend
three or four days here--and mean to be back early next week.

     THINE OWNEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Washington_, April 28th, Thursday. 1853

     _Dearest_,

The President has asked me to remain in the city a few days longer,
for particular reasons; but I think I shall be free to leave by
Saturday. It is very queer how much I have done for other people and
myself since my arrival here. Colonel Miller is to be here to-night.
Ticknor stands by me manfully, and will not quit me until we see
Boston again.

I went to Mount Vernon yesterday with the ladies of the President's
family. Thou never sawst such a beautiful and blossoming Spring as we
have here.

Expect me early in next week. How I long to be in thy arms is
impossible to tell. Tell the children I love them all.

     THINEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, July 26th, '54

     _Dearest Wife_,

We had the pleasantest passage, yesterday, that can be conceived of.
How strange, that the best weather I have ever known should have come
to us on these English coasts!

I enclose some letters from the O'Sullivan's, whereby you will see
that they have come to a true appreciation of Mr. Cecil's merits. They
say nothing of his departure; but I shall live in daily terror of his
arrival.

I hardly think it worth while for me to return to the island, this
summer;--that is, unless you conclude to stay longer than a week from
this time. Do so, by all means, if you think the residence will
benefit either yourself or the children. Or it would be easy to return
thither, should it seem desirable--or to go somewhere else. Tell me
what day you fix upon for leaving; and I will either await you in
person at the landing-place, or send Henry. Do not start, unless the
weather promises to be favorable, even though you should be all ready
to go on board.

I think you should give something to the servants--those of them, at
least, who have taken any particular pains with you. Michael asked me
for something, but I told him that I should probably be back
again;--so you must pay him my debts and your own too.

It is very lonesome at Rock Ferry, and I long to have you all back
again. Give my love to the children.

     THINE OWNEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, Sept. 12th, 1854

     _Dearest_,

We arrived safe at Rock Ferry at about ten. Emily had gone to bed, but
came down in her night-clothes--the queerest figure I ever saw.

I enclose a letter from thy brother N. It contains one piece of
intelligence very interesting to the parties concerned.

Mr. O'Sullivan is going to London, this afternoon. I wish thou wast at
home, for the house is very cheerless in its solitude. But it will be
only a few days before I see thee again; and in the meantime thou must
go to all accessible places, and enjoy thyself for both of us. The
barometer goes backward to-day, and indicates a proximate change of
weather. What wilt thou do in a rain-storm?

I am weighed down and disheartened by the usual immense pile of
American newspapers. What a miserable country!

Kiss all the old people for me--Julian, as well as the others.

     Thine ownest,

     N. H.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, July 30th, 1855

     _Dearest_,

I slept at Lancaster, last night, where I arrived at 10 o'clock; and
leaving at Â½ past nine, this morning, got here at twelve.

Since leaving you, I have been thinking that we have skimmed the cream
of the lakes, and perhaps may as well go somewhere else, now. What if
you should come to Liverpool (that is, to Rock Ferry Hotel) and spend
a day or two, for the sake of variety, and then go to Matlock or
Malvern, or wherever we may think best? Should you conclude to do
this, I think you had better take a phaeton & pair from Grasmere to
Windermere, and there you can get on the rail. If you wish to stay
longer at the lakes, however, I shall be quite happy to come back. Mr.
Wildeys says that lodgings may be had reasonable (and some at farmers'
houses) in the vicinity of Bourness; but he does not know of any in
particular.

Weigh these matters, and decide for yourself. I have an impression, I
hardly know why, that we have done with the lakes for this year; but I
should not regret to have you stay longer.

I send the halves of a Â£10 & of a Â£5.

There would be no difficulty in your coming here without a male
attendant.

Do not think that I wish you to come, contrary to your opinion. If you
and the children are comfortable & happy, I am quite content to take
another draught of the lakes.

Kiss them all.

     THINE N.

Mr. Bradford and Miss Ripley sailed a fortnight ago.

Mr. Bright was in this morning.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, Novr. 3d, 1855

     _Dearest wife_,

I received your letter a week ago, telling me of your woeful passage
and safe arrival. If I had thought how much you were to suffer on the
voyage, I never could have consented to thy departure; but I hope thou
art now flourishing in the southern sunshine, and I am sure it would
have been a dreadful matter for thee to remain in such weather as we
have lately had. But I do so long to see thee! If it were not for
Julian, I do not think I could bear it at all. He is really a great
comfort and joy to me, and rather unexpectedly so; for I must confess
I wished to keep him here on his own account and thine, much more than
on my own. We live together in great love and harmony, the best
friends in the world. He has begun to go to dancing-school; and I have
heard of a drawing-master for him, but do not yet let him take
lessons, because they might interfere with his day-school, should we
conclude to send him thither. His health and spirits seem now to be
perfectly good; and I think he is benefitted by a greater regularity
of eating than when at home. He never has anything between meals, and
seems not to want anything. Mrs. Blodgett, Miss Williams, and their
niece, all take motherly care of him, combing his wool, and seeing
that he looks clean and gentlemanly as a Consul's son ought to do.
Since the war-cloud has begun to darken over us, he insists on
buckling on his sword the moment he is dressed, and never lays it
aside till he is ready to go to bed--after drawing it, and making
blows and thrusts at Miss Williams's tom-cat, for lack of a better
antagonist. I trust England and America will have fought out their
warfare before his worship's beard begins to sprout; else he will
pester us by going forth to battle.

I crossed over to Rock Ferry, a few days ago; and thou canst not
imagine the disgust and horror with which I greeted that abominable
old pier. The atmosphere of the river absolutely sawed me asunder. If
we had been wise enough to avoid the river, I believe thou wouldst
have found the climate of England quite another thing; for though we
have had very bad weather for weeks past, the air of the town has
nothing like the malevolence of that of the river. Mrs. Hantress is
quite well, and inquires very affectionately about thee, and the
children, and Fanny. Mrs. Watson crossed in the same boat with me. She
has taken a house at Cloughton, and was now going over to deliver up
the keys of the Rock Ferry house. I forgot to inquire about Miss
Sheppard, and do not know whether she has succeeded in letting our
house.

I dined at Mr. Bright's on Thursday evening. Of course, there were the
usual expressions of interest in thy welfare; and Annie desired to be
remembered to Una. Mr. Channing called on me, a few days since. He has
just brought his family from Southport, where they have been spending
several weeks. Our conversation was chiefly on the subject of the
approaching war; for there has suddenly come up a mysterious rumor and
ominous disturbance of all men's spirits, as black and awful as a
thunder-gust. So far as I can ascertain, Mr. Buchanan considers the
aspect of affairs very serious indeed; and a letter, said to be
written with his privity, was communicated to the Americans here,
telling of the breach of treaties, and a determination on the part of
the British Government to force us into war. It will need no great
force, however, if the Yankees are half so patriotic at home, as we on
this side of the water. We hold the fate of England in our hands, and
it is time we crushed her--blind, ridiculous, old lump of beef, sodden
in strong beer, that she is; not but what she has still vitality
enough to do us a good deal of mischief, before we quite annihilate
her.

At Mr. Bright's table, for the first time, I heard the expression of a
fear that the French alliance was going to be ruinous to England, and
that Louis Napoleon was getting his arm too closely about the neck of
Britannia, insomuch that the old lady will soon find herself short of
breath. I think so indeed! He is at the bottom of these present
commotions.

One good effect of a war would be, that I should speedily be warned
out of England, and should betake myself to Lisbon. But how are we to
get home? Luckily, I don't care much about getting home at all; and we
will be cosmopolites, and pitch our tent in any peaceable and pleasant
spot we can find, and perhaps get back to Concord by the time our
larch-trees have ten years' growth. Dost thou like this prospect?

What a beautiful letter was thine! I do think nobody else ever wrote
such letters, so magically descriptive and narrative. I have read it
over and over and over to myself, and aloud to Julian, whose face
shone as he listened. By-the-by, I meant that he should have written a
letter to accompany this; but this is his dancing-school day, and I
did not bring him to the Consulate. One packet of letters, intended
for Lisbon, has mysteriously vanished; and I cannot imagine what has
become of it, unless it were slipt by mistake into Ticknor's
letter-bag, and so went to America by the last steamer. It contained a
letter from thy sister Elizabeth, one from Julian, and myself, and, I
believe, one from Mr. Dixon.

Did you pay a bill (of between one or two pounds) of Frisbie, Dyke &
Co.? I inquired in my last about Mr. Weston's bill for coals.

Do not stint thyself on the score of expenses, but live and dress and
spend like a lady of station. It is entirely reasonable and necessary
that thou shouldst. Send Una to whatever schools, and let her take
whatever lessons, thou deemest good.

Kiss Una; kiss naughty little Rosebud. Give my individual love to
everybody.

     THINE OWN, OWNEST, OWNESTEST.


P.S. Since writing the above, Mr. Channing has been in, and thou
wouldst be (as I am) at once confounded and delighted to hear the
warlike tone in which he talks. He thinks that the Government of
England is trying to force us into a war, and he says, in so many
words, "LET IT COME!!!" He is already considering how he is to get
home, and says that he feels ready to enlist; and he breathes blood
and vengeance against whomsoever shall molest our shores. Huzza!
Huzza! I begin to feel warlike, too. There was a rumor yesterday, that
our minister had demanded his passports; and I am mistaken in Frank
Pierce if Mr. Crampton has not already been ejected from Washington.

No doubt O'Sullivan's despatches will enable him to give thee more
authentic intelligence than I possess as to the real prospects.

     N. H.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, February 7th, 1856

Thy letter, my own most beloved, (dated Jany. 31st) arrived yesterday,
and revived me at once out of a state of half-torpor, half
misery--just as much of each as could co-exist with the other. Do not
think that I am always in that state; but one thing, dearest, I have
been most thoroughly taught by this separation--that is, the absolute
necessity of expression. I must tell thee I love thee. I must be told
that thou lovest me. It must be said in words and symbolized with
caresses; or else, at last, imprisoned Love will go frantic, and tear
all to pieces the heart that holds it. And the only other alternative
is to be torpid. I just manage to hold out from one letter of thine to
another; and then comes life and joy again. Thou canst not conceive
what an effect yesterday's letter had on me. It renewed my youth, and
made my step lighter; it absolutely gave me an appetite; and I went
to bed joyfully to think of it. Oh, my wife, why did God give thee
to poor unworthy me! Art thou sure that He made thee for me? Ah, thy
intuition must have been well-founded on this point; because,
otherwise, all through eternity, thou wouldst carry my stain upon
thee; and how could thine own angel ever need thee then! Thou art
mine!--Thou _shalt_ be mine! Thou hast given thyself to me
irredeemably. Thou hast grown to me. Thou canst never get away.

Oh, my love, it is a desperate thing that I cannot see thee this very
instant. Dost thou ever feel, at one and the same moment, the
impossibility of doing without me, and also the impossibility of
having me? I know not how it is that my strong wishes do not bring
thee here bodily, while I am writing these words. One of the two
impossibilities must needs be overcome; and it seems the strongest
impossibility that thou shouldst be anywhere else, when I need thee so
insufferably.

Well, my own wife, I have a little wreaked myself now, and will go on
more quietly with what I have further to say. As regards
O'Sullivan--(how funny that thou shouldst put quotation marks to this
name, as if astonished at my calling him so! Did we not entirely agree
in thinking "John" an undue and undesirable familiarity? But thou
mayst call him "John," or "Jack" either, as best suits thee.)--as
regards O'Sullivan, then, my present opinion of him is precisely what
thou thyself didst leave upon my mind, in our discussions of his
character. I have often had a similar experience before, resulting
from thy criticism upon any views of mine. Thou insensibly convertest
me to thy own opinion, and art afterwards surprised to find it so; in
fact, I seldom am aware of the change in my own mind, until the
subject chances to come up for further discussion, and I find myself
on what was thy side.

But I will try to give my true idea of his character. I know that he
has most vivid affections--a quick, womanly sensibility--a light and
tender grace, which, in happy circumstances, would make all his deeds
and demonstrations beautiful. In respect to companionship, beyond all
doubt, he has never been in such fortunate circumstances as during his
present intercourse with thee; and I am willing to allow that thou
bringest out his angelic part, and therefore canst not be expected to
see anything but an angel in him. It has sometimes seemed to me that
the lustre of his angel-plumage has been a little dimmed--his
heavenly garments a little soiled and bedraggled--by the foul ways
through which it has been his fate to tread, and the foul companions
with whom necessity and politics have brought him acquainted. But I
had rather thou shouldst take _him_ for a friend than any other man I
ever knew (unless, perhaps, George Bradford, who can hardly be
reckoned a man at all,) because I think the Devil has a smaller share
in O'Sullivan than in other bipeds who wear breeches. To do him
justice, he is miraculously pure and true, considering what his
outward life has been. Now, dearest, I have a genuine affection for
him, and a confidence in his honor; and as respects his defects in
everything that concerns pecuniary matters, I believe him to have kept
his integrity intact to a degree that is really wonderful, in spite of
the embarrassments of a lifetime. If we had his whole life mapped out
before us, I should probably forgive him some things which thy severer
sense of right would condemn. Thou talkest of his high principle; but
that does not appear to me to be his kind of moral endowment. Perhaps
he may have the material that principles are manufactured from.

My beloved, he is not the man in whom I see my ideal of a friend; not
for his lack of principle, not for any ill-deeds or practical
shortcomings which I know of or suspect; not but what he is amiable,
loveable, fully capable of self-sacrifice, utterly incapable of
selfishness. The only reason, that I can put into words, is, that he
never stirs me to any depth beneath my surface; I like him, and enjoy
his society, and he calls up, I think, whatever small part of me is
elegant and agreeable; but neither of my best nor of my worst has he
ever, or could he ever, have a glimpse. I should wish my friend of
friends to be a sterner and grimmer man than he; and it is my opinion,
sweetest wife, that the truest manly delicacy is to be found in those
stern, grim natures--a little alpine flower, of tenderest texture, and
loveliest hue, and delicious fragrance, springing out of a rocky soil
in a high, breezy, mountain atmosphere. O'Sullivan's quick, genial
soil produces an abundant growth of flowers, but not just this
precious little flower. He is too much like a woman, without being a
woman; and between the two characters, he misses the quintessential
delicacy of both. There are some tests of thorough refinement which,
perhaps, he could not stand. And yet I shall not dispute that for
refinement and delicacy he is one out of a thousand; and we might
spend a lifetime together without putting him to a test too severe.
As for his sympathies, he would be always ready to pour them out (not
exactly like Niagara, but like a copious garden-fountain) for those he
loved.

If thou thinkest I have done him great injustice in the foregoing
sketch, it is very probable that thou wilt bring me over to thy way of
thinking; and perhaps balance matters by passing over to mine.

Dearest, I do hope I shall next hear of thee from Madeira; for this
suspense is hard to bear. Thou must not mind what I say to thee, in my
impatient agonies, about coming back. Whatever can be borne, I shall
find myself able to bear, for the sake of restoring thee to health. I
have now groped so far through the thick darkness that [a] little
glimmer of light begins to appear at the other end of the passage; it
will grow clearer and brighter continually, and at last it will show
me my dearest wife. I do hope thou wilt find thy husband wiser and
better than he has been hitherto; wiser, in knowing the more
adequately what a treasure he has in thee; and better, because I feel
it such a shame to be loved by thee without deserving it. Dost thou
love me?

Give my love to Una, to whom I cannot write now, without doubling
the postage. Do not let little Rosebud forget me. Remember me to
Fanny, and present my regards to Madame O'Sullivan, and Mrs. Susan,
and Miss Rodgers. So all is said very properly.

Thou toldest me not to write to Madeira before hearing from thee
there; but I shall send this to the care of the American Consul, to
whom I wrote by the last Lisbon steamer, sending the letter to
O'Sullivan's care. Thine own-ownest.

Julian is perfectly well.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, March 18th, 1856

In a little while longer, ownest wife, we must think about thy return
to England. The thought is a happiness greater than I can crowd into
my mind. Wilt thou think it best to go back to Lisbon? This must
depend, I suppose, on the length of stay of the O'Sullivans in
Madeira. If they return to Lisbon before June, thou wilt have to go
with them; if they stay so late as the first of June, I should think
it best for thee to come direct to Southampton; but I leave it to thy
decision, as thou canst weigh all the circumstances. I somewhat dread
thy returning to this miserable island at all; for I fear, even if
Madeira quite rids thee of thy cough, England will at once give it
back. But Elizabeth has sent thee a certain article which is vouched
for, by numerous certificates, as a certain cure for all coughs and
affections of the lungs. So far as I can ascertain its structure, it
consists of some layers of quilted flannel, covered with an
oilcloth; and the whole thing is not more than three inches square. It
is worn on the breast, next the skin, and, being so small, it would
not be perceptible under the thinnest dress. In order to make it
efficacious, it is to be moistened with some liquor from a bottle
which accompanied it; and it keeps the person comfortably warm, and
appears to operate like a charm, and makes a little Madeira of its own
about the wearer. If thou wast not so very naughty--if thou wouldst
consent to be benefitted by anything but homeopathy--here in this
little box is health and joy for us!--yes, the possibility of sitting
down together in a mud-puddle, or in the foggiest hole in England, and
being perfectly well and happy. Oh, mine ownest love, I shall clap
this little flannel talisman upon thy dearest bosom, the moment thou
dost touch English soil. Every instant it shall be shielded by the
flannel. I have drawn the size and thickness of it, above.

We are plodding on here, Julian and I, in the same dull way. The old
boy, however, is happy enough; and I must not forget to tell thee that
Mary W. has taken him into her good graces, and has quite thrown off
another boy, who, Julian says, has heretofore been her "adorer." I
told Julian that he must expect to be cast aside in favor of somebody
else, by-and-bye. "Then I shall tell her that I am very much ashamed
of her," said he. "No," I answered; "you must bear it with a good
grace and not let her know that you are mortified." "But why shouldn't
I let her know it, if I _am_ mortified?" asked he; and really, on
consideration, I thought there was more dignity and self-respect in
his view of the case, than in mine; so I told him to act as he thought
right. But I don't think he will be much hurt or mortified; for his
feelings are marvellously little interested, after all, and he sees
her character and criticises her with a shrewdness that quite
astonishes me. He is a wonderfully observant boy; nothing escapes his
notice; nothing, hardly, deceives his judgment. His intellect is
certainly very remarkable, and it is almost a miracle to see it
combined with so warm and true and simple a heart. But his heart
admits very few persons into it, large though it be. He is not, I
think, of a diffusive, but of a concentrative tendency, both as
regards mind and affections.

In Grace Greenwood's last "Little Pilgrim," there is a description of
her new baby!!! in response to numerous inquiries which, she says,
have been received from her subscribers. I wonder she did not think
it necessary to be brought to bed in public, or, at least, in presence
of a committee of the subscribers. My dearest, I cannot enough thank
God, that, with a higher and deeper intellect than any other woman,
thou hast never--forgive me the base idea!--never prostituted thyself
to the public, as that woman has, and as a thousand others do. It does
seem to me to deprive women of all delicacy. Women are too good for
authorship, and that is the reason it spoils them so.

The Queen of England is said to be going to Lisbon, this summer; so
perhaps thou wouldst rather stay there and be introduced to her, than
come hither and be embraced by me--The O'Sullivans would not miss
seeing her, I suppose, for all the husbands on earth. Dearest, I do
not like those three women very much; and, indeed, they cannot be good
and amiable, nor wise, since, after living with thee for months, they
have not made thee feel that they value thee above all things else.
Neither am I satisfied with Mr. Welsh's turning thee out of his house.

Mr. Dallas, our new Ambassador, arrived at Liverpool a few days ago;
and I had to be civil to him and his son, and to at least five ladies
whom he brought with him. He seems to be a good old gentleman
enough, and of venerable aspect; but as regards ability, I should
judge Mr. Buchanan to be worth twenty of him. Dost thou know that we
are going to have a war? It is now quite certain; and I hope I shall
be ordered out of the country in season to meet thee at Madeira. Dost
thou not believe me?

March 19th.--Ownest beloved, this morning came thy letter of the 9th,
by the African steamer. I knew it could not be much longer delayed,
for my heart was getting intolerably hungry. Oh, my wife, thou hast
been so ill! And thou art blown about the world, in the midst of rain
and whirlwind! It was a most foolish project of O'Sullivan's (as all
his projects are) to lead thee from his comfortable fireside, to that
comfortless Madeira. And thou sayest, or Una says, that the rainy
season is just commencing there, and that this month and the next are
the two worst months of the year! Thou _never_ again shalt go away
anywhere without me. My two arms shall be thy tropics, and my breast
thy equator; and from henceforth forever I will keep thee a great deal
too warm, so that thou shalt cry out--"Do let me breathe the cool
outward air for a moment!" But I will not.

As regards teaching Julian French, I wish I had found a master for
him when we first left thee; but there seemed to be so many
difficulties in making him really and seriously study, without
companions, and without constant supervision, that I let it alone,
thinking that, on the continent, all lost time would quickly be made
up. And now it will be so little while before thy return, that I doubt
whether much would be accomplished in the meantime. It is very
difficult to get him really interested in any solitary study; and as
he could not take more than two lessons in a week, and would have
nobody to practise pronounciation with, in the intervals, I think, the
result would be only an ineffectual commencement. I have not myself
the slightest tact or ability in making him study, or in compelling
him to do anything that he is not inclined to do of his own accord;
and to tell thee the truth, he has pretty much his own way in
everything. At least, such is my impression; but thou hast so often
told me of the strength of my will (of which I am not in the least
conscious) that it is very possible I may have been ruling him with a
rod of iron, all the time. It is true, I have a sort of inert and
negative power, with which I should strongly interpose to keep him out
of mischief; but I am always inclined to let him wander around at
his own sweet will, as long as the path is a safe one. Thou hast
incomparably greater faculty of command than I have.

I think he must remain untaught till thou comest back to take the
helm. Thou wilt find him a good and honest boy, healthy in mind, and
healthier in heart than when he left thee; ready to begin his
effectual education as soon as circumstances will permit. Let this
suffice. In body, too, he never was better in his life than now; and
he is a real little rampant devil for physical strength. I find it an
arduous business, now-a-days, to take him across my knee and spank
him; and unless I give up the attempt betimes, he will soon be the
spanker, and his poor father the spankee.

I am going to dine at Mr. Bright's, this evening. He has often
besought me that Julian might come and spend a few days at Sandheys;
and I think I shall let him go, and take the opportunity to run up to
London. What vicissitudes of country and climate thou hast run
through, while I have never once stirred out of this mud and fog of
Liverpool! After returning from London, and as Spring advances, I mean
to make little excursions of a day or two with Julian.

Oh, dearest, dearest, interminably and infinitely dearest--I don't
know how to end that ejaculation. The use of kisses and caresses is,
that they supersede language, and express what there are no words for.
I need them at this moment--need to give them, & to receive them.

     THINE OWNEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     32, St. Anne's Place, _London_, April 7th, 1856

Best wife in the world, here I am in London; for I found it quite
impossible to draw any more breath in that abominable Liverpool
without allowing myself a momentary escape into better air. I could
not take Julian with me; and so I disposed of him, much to his own
satisfaction, first with the Brights, then with the Channings; and I
have now been here more than a week, and shall remain till Thursday.
The old boy writes to me in the best of spirits; and I rather think he
can do without me better than I can without him; for I really find I
love him _a little_, and that his society is one of my necessities,
including, as he does, thyself and everything else that I love.
Nevertheless, my time has been so much occupied in London, that I have
not been able to brood over the miseries of heart-solitudes. They have
found me out, these London people, and I believe I should have
engagements for every day, and two or three a day, if I staid here
through the season. They thicken upon me, the longer I remain.
To-night, I am to dine with the Lord Mayor, and shall have to make a
speech!! Good Heavens! I wish I might have been spared this. Tomorrow
night, I shall dine in the House of Commons, with a member of
Parliament, in order to hear a debate. In short, I have been lionized,
and am still being lionized; and this one experience will be quite
sufficient for me. I find it something between a botheration and a
satisfaction.

Oh, my dearest, I feel that my heart will be very heavy, as soon as I
get back to Liverpool; for thy cough is not getting better, and our
dear little Rosebud has been ill! And I was not there! And I do not
know--and shall not know for many days--what may have since happened
to her and thee! This is very hard to bear. We ought never, never, to
have separated. It is most unnatural. It cannot be borne. How strange
that it _must_ be borne!

Most beloved, I have sent down to Liverpool for Elizabeth's talisman
and medicine-bottles; for Mr. Marsh is now in London, and perhaps he
will be able to take them to thee. I fear, however, that they will not
reach me in time to be delivered to him, and I shall be afraid to
trust them to any but a private conveyance. If they come, I hope thou
wilt give them a fair trial, at least, if the weather still continues
cold and wet. What a wretched world we live in! Not one little nook or
corner where thou canst draw a wholesome breath! In all our
separation, I have never once felt so utterly desperate as at this
moment. I _cannot_ bear it.

Everybody inquires about thee. I spent yesterday (Sunday) at Mrs. S.
C. Hall's country-seat, and she was very affectionate in her
inquiries, and gave me this very sheet of paper on which I am now
writing--also some violets, which I have lost, though I promised
faithfully to send them to Madeira. Dear me, I wish I had a little bit
of sentiment! Didst thou ever read any of her books? She is a very
good and kind person, and so is her husband, though he besmeared me
with such sweetness of laudation, that I feel all over bestuck, as
after handling sweetmeats or molasses-candy. There is a limit of
decorum which ought not to be over-stept.

I met Miss Cushman, on Saturday, in the Strand, and she asked me to
dinner, but I could not go, being already engaged to meet another
actress! I have a strange run of luck as regards actresses, having
made friends with the three most prominent ones since I came to
London, and I find them all excellent people; and they all inquire for
thee!! Mrs. Bennoch, too, wishes to see thee very much. Unless thou
comest back in very vigorous health, it will never do for us to take
lodgings in London for any considerable time, because it would be
impossible to keep quiet. Neither shall I dare to have thee come back
to Liverpool, accursed place that it is! We will settle ourselves in
the South of England, until the autumn, and then (unless Elizabeth's
talisman works miracles) we must be gone. The trip to Scotland, I
fear, must be quite given up. I suppose, as regards climate, Scotland
is only a more intensely disagreeable England.

Oh, my wife, I do want thee so intolerably. Nothing else is real,
except the bond between thee and me. The people around me are but
shadows. I am myself but a shadow, till thou takest me in thy arms,
and convertest me into substance. Till thou comest back, I do but walk
in a dream.

I think a great deal about poor little Rosebud, and find that I loved
her about ten million times as much as I had any idea of. Really,
dearest wife, I have a heart, although, heretofore, thou hast had
great reason to doubt it. But it yearns, and throbs, and burns with a
hot fire, for thee, and for the children that have grown out of our
loves. Una, too! I long unutterably to see her, and cannot bear to
think that she has been growing out of her childhood, all the time,
without my witnessing each day's change. But the first moment, when we
meet again, will set everything right. Oh, blessed moment!

Well, dearest, I must close now, and go in search of Mr. Marsh, whom I
have not yet been able to see. God bless thee! I cannot see why He has
permitted so much rain, and such cold winds, where thou art.

     THINE OWNEST, OWNEST.

I have no time to read over the above, and know not what I have said,
nor left unsaid.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, Novr. 24th, 1858

     _Dearest Wife_,

Your letter by the steamer of the 19th has come, and has given me
delight far beyond what I can tell thee. There never were such letters
in the world as thine; but this, no doubt, I have already told thee
over and over. What pleasantly surprises me is, that the beauty of thy
hand-writing has all come back, in these Lisbon letters, and they seem
precisely the same, in that respect, that my little virgin Dove used
to write me.

Before this reaches thee, thou wilt have received the trunks by the
Cintra, and also, the sad news of the death of O'Sullivan's brother. I
shall wait with the utmost anxiety for thy next letter. Do not thou
sympathise too much. Thou art wholly mine, and must not overburthen
thyself with anybody's grief--not even that of thy dearest friend next
to me. I wish I could be with thee.

I am impatient for thee to be well. Thou shouldst not trust wholly to
the climate, but must take medical advice--in Lisbon, if it is to be
had--otherwise, Dr. Wilkinson's. _Do_ take cod-liver oil. It is the
only thing I ever really had any faith in; and thou wilt not take it.
Thou dost confess to growing thin. Take cod-liver oil, and, at all
events, grow fat.

I suppose this calamity of the O'Sullivans will quite shut them up
from the world, at present.

Julian thrives, as usual. He has lately been out to dine with a boy of
about his own age, in the neighborhood. His greatest daily grievance
is, that he is not allowed to have his dinner at 5Â½, with the rest of
the family, but dines at one, and sups alone at our dinner time. He
never has anything between meals, unless it be apples. I believe I
told thee, in my last, that I had give up the thought of sending him
to school, for the present. It would be so great and hazardous a
change, in the whole system of his life, that I do not like to risk it
as long as he continues to do well. The intercourse which he holds
with the people of Mrs. Blodgett's seems to me of a healthy kind. They
make a playmate of him, to a certain extent, but do him no mischief;
whereas, the best set of boys in the world would infallibly bring him
harm as well as good. His manners improve, and I do not at all
despair of seeing him grow up a gentleman. It is singular how
completely all his affections of the head have disappeared;--and that,
too, without any prescriptions from Dr. Dryasdust. I encourage him to
make complaints of his health, rather than the contrary; but he always
declares himself quite well. The difficulty heretofore has been, I
think, that he had grown morbid for want of a wider sphere.

Miss Williams is very unwell, and, for the last two or three days, has
had several visits from the Doctor;--being confined to her bed, and in
great pain. I don't know what her disorder is; but she is excessively
nervous, and is made ill by anything that agitates her. The rumor of
war with America confined her for several days.

Give my most affectionate regards to the O'Sullivans. I never felt
half so grateful to anybody, as I do to them, for the care they take
of thee. It would make a summer climate of Nova Zembla, to say nothing
of Lisbon.

     THINE OWNEST.

P.S. I enclose the gold dollar.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, Decr. 11th, 1858

     _Dearest_,

This despatch for O'Sullivan has just reached me; and I do not know
whether there will be time to send it by the steamer that sails
to-day.

Your letters, written immediately after the receipt of the sad news,
did not reach me till yesterday; while those by the Southampton
steamer, written afterwards, arrived here days ago. Those Liverpool
steamers are not nearly such safe mediums as those by Southampton; and
no letters of importance ought to be trusted to them.

Mrs. Blodgett will buy the articles required by Mrs. O'Sullivan, and
likewise the soap for you, and have them in readiness for the next
Liverpool steamer.

We are quite well (Julian and I) and as contented as we can expect to
be, among strangers, and in a continual cold fog. I have heard no
private news from America, since I wrote last.

I have not a moment's time to write Una; but kiss her for me, and
Rosebud too. Neither can I tell thee, in this little moment, how
infinitely I love thee.

     THINEST.

P.S. Tell O'Sullivan that Mr. Miller (Despatch Agent) will allow the
postage of this package in his account with Government.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Liverpool_, Decr. 13th, 1858

     _Dearest_,

I wrote thee a brief note by a steamer from this port on the 11th,
with O'Sullivan's despatches. Nothing noteworthy has happened since;
and nothing can happen in this dawdling[A] life of ours. The best
thing about our Liverpool days is, that they are very short; it is
hardly morning, before night comes again. Una says that the weather in
Lisbon is very cold. So it is here--that searching, spiteful cold that
creeps all through one's miserable flesh; and if I had to cross the
river, as last winter, I do believe I should drown myself in despair.
Nevertheless, Julian and I are in excellent condition, though the old
boy often grumbles--"It is very cold, papa!"--as he takes his morning
bath.

[A] On reading over my letter, I cannot make out this word.]

The other day, speaking of his first advent into this world, Julian
said, "I don't remember how I came down from Heaven; but I'm very
glad I happened to tumble into so good a family!" He was serious in
this; and it is certainly very queer, that, at nearly ten years old,
he should still accept literally our first explanation of how he came
to be among us.

Thy friend John O'Hara still vagabondises about the street; at least,
I met him, some time since, with a basket of apples on his arm, very
comfortably clad and looking taller than of yore. I gave him an
eleemosynary sixpence, as he told me he was getting on pretty well.
Yesterday, his abominable mother laid siege to my office during the
greater part of the day, pretending to have business with me. I
refused to see her; and she then told Mr. Wilding that her husband was
gone to Ireland, and that John was staying at Rock Ferry with Mrs.
Woodward, or whatever the lady's name may be, and that she herself had
no means of support. But I remained as obdurate as a paving-stone,
knowing that, if I yielded this once, she would expect me to supply
her with the means of keeping drunk as long as I stay in Liverpool.
She hung about the office till dusk, but finally raised the siege.

Julian looks like a real boy now; for Mrs. Blodgett has his hair cut
at intervals of a month or so, and though I thought his aspect very
absurd, at first, yet I have come to approve it rather than otherwise.
The good lady does what she can to keep his hands clean, and his nails
in proper condition--for which he is not as grateful as he should be.
There is to be a ball at his dancing-school, next week, at which the
boys are to wear jackets and white pantaloons; and I have commissioned
Miss Maria to get our old gentleman equipped in a proper manner. It is
funny how he gives his mighty mind to this business of dancing, and
even dreams, as he assured me, about quadrilles. His master has
praised him a good deal, and advanced him to a place among his elder
scholars. When the time comes for Julian to study in good earnest, I
perceive that this feeling of emulation will raise his steam to a
prodigious height. In drawing (having no competitors) he does not
apply himself so earnestly as to the Terpsichorean science; yet he
succeeds so well that, last night, I mistook a sketch of his for one
of his master's. Mrs. Blodgett and the ladies think his progress quite
wonderful; the master says, rather coolly, that he has a very
tolerable eye for form.

Una seems to be taking rapid strides towards womanhood. I shall not
see her a child again; that stage has passed like a dream--a dream
merging into another dream. If Providence had not done it, as thou
sayest, I should deeply regret her having been present at this recent
grief-time of the O'Sullivans. It did not seem to me that she needed
experiences of that kind; for life has never been light and joyous to
her. Her letters make me smile, and sigh, too; they are such letters
as a girl of fifteen would write, with a vein of sentiment continually
cropping up, as the geologists say, through the surface. Then the
religious tone startles me a little. Would it be well--(perhaps it
would, I really don't know)--for religion to be intimately connected,
in her mind, with forms and ceremonials, and sanctified places of
worship? Shall the whole sky be the dome of her cathedral?--or must
she compress the Deity into a narrow space, for the purpose of getting
at him more readily? Wouldst thou like to have her follow Aunt Lou and
Miss Rodgers into that musty old Church of England? This looks very
probable to me; but thou wilt know best how it is, and likewise
whether it had better be so, or not. If it is natural for Una to
remain within those tenets, she will be happiest there; but if her
moral and intellectual development should compel her hereafter to
break from them, it would be with the more painful wrench for having
once accepted them.

December 14th.--Friday.--O'Sullivan desires me to send American
newspapers. I shall send some with the parcel by the Liverpool steamer
of the 21st; and likewise through John Miller, whenever I have any
late ones; but the English Post Office does not recognize American
newspapers as being newspapers at all, and will not forward them
except for letter postage. This would be ruinous, considering that the
rate for single letters, between here and Lisbon, is a shilling and
sixpence; and a bundle of newspapers, at a similar rate, would cost
several pounds. I _won't_ do it.

Miss Williams has not yet left her chamber. Her illness was very
serious, and Mrs. Blodgett was greatly alarmed about her; but I
believe she is now hopefully convalescent.

Julian is outgrowing all the clothes he has, and is tightening
terribly in best sack, and absolutely bursting through his trousers.
No doubt thou wouldst blaspheme at his appearance; but all boys are
the awkwardest and unbeautifullest creatures whom God has made. I
don't know that he looks any worse than the rest. I have given Mrs.
Blodgett the fullest liberty to get him whatever she thinks best. He
ought to look like a gentleman's son, for the ladies of our family
like to have him with them as their cavalier and protector, when they
go a-shopping. It amazes me to see the unabashed front with which he
goes into society.

I have done my best, in the foregoing scribble, to put thee in
possession of the outward circumstances of our position. It is a very
dull life; but I live it hopefully, because thou (my true life) will
be restored to me by-and-by. If I had known what thou wouldst have to
suffer, through thy sympathies, I would not for the world have sent
thee to Lisbon; but we were in a strait, and I knew no other way. Take
care of thyself for my sake. Remember me affectionately to the
O'Sullivans.

     THINEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     31, Hertford St., _London_,
     May 17th, Thursday [1859]

     _Dearest_,

Una must be tired of the monotony of receiving letters from me; and
perhaps thou wilt be willing to relieve her, just for once. Her
letter, and Julian's, and Rosebud's, all three gave me great pleasure;
and I was particularly astonished at the old boy's learned epistle--so
learned, indeed, that it cost me some study to comprehend it. He is
certainly a promising lad, and I wish I could answer his letter in
Hebrew.

Affairs succeed each other so fast, that I have really forgotten what
I did yesterday. I remember seeing Henry Bright, and listening to a
stream of babble from his lips, as we strolled in the Park and along
the Strand. Today, I have breakfasted with Fields, and met, among
other people, Mr. Field Talfourd, who promises to send thee a
photograph of his portrait of Mr. Browning. He was very agreeable,
and seemed delighted to see me again. At lunch, we had Lady Dufferin,
Mrs. Norton, and Mrs. Sterling, author of the Cloister Life of Charles
V., with whom we are to dine on Sunday. Thou wouldst be stricken dumb
to see how quietly I accept a whole string of invitations, and, what
is more, perform my engagements without a murmur.

A little German artist has come to me with a letter of introduction,
and a request that I will sit to him for a portrait in bas-relief. To
this, likewise, I have consented!!!--Subject to the condition that I
shall have my leisure.

Mr. Fields has given me, for thee, The Idylls of the King--not the
American, but the English edition.

I have had time to see Bennoch only once. If I go to Canterbury at
all, it must be after my visit to Cambridge; and in that case, I shall
have to defer my return till the 31st of May. I cannot yet tell how it
will be.

The stir of this London life, somehow or other, has done me a
wonderful deal of good, and I feel better than for months past. This
is queer, for, if I had my choice, I should leave undone almost all
the things I do.

I have bought a large Alpaca umbrella, costing nine shillings.
Probably I shall mislay it before my return.

I trust thou dost not burthen thyself with cares. Do drive about, and
see Bath, and make thyself jolly with thy glass of wine.

Remembrances to Fanny, and love to great and small.

     Thine,

     NATH' HAWTHORNE.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     _Pride's Crossing_, Thursday, Aug. 8th, '61

     _Dearest wife_,

This is a very ugly morning, and, I am afraid, will keep Julian and me
at home. The old gentleman had planned a fishing expedition and will
probably insist upon it pretty strenuously, in spite of the imminent
danger of rain. He seems insatiable in his love of the sea, and
regrets that we have but a day or two more to stay, as much as I
rejoice of it.

Thou dost insist too strongly upon the inconveniences and discomforts
of our present abode. I rather need to have the good side of our
condition presented to me than the bad one--being sufficiently prompt
in discovering the latter for myself; and this is true in almost all
cases. I first look at matters in their darkest aspect, and having
satisfied myself with that, I begin gradually to be consoled, to take
into account the advantages of the case, and thus trudge on, in my
heavy way, but with the light brightening around me. Now, while this
process is going on, methinks it would be more advisable to assist the
benigner influence than to range thyself on the side of the sinister
demon, and assure me that I am suffering a thousand inconveniences, of
which I am beginning to be unconscious.

I doubt whether I could have been more comfortable anywhere else than
here. The people of the house are very worthy souls, both of them,
entirely unobtrusive, doing everything they can for us, and evidently
anxious to give us the worth of our money--and kindly disposed,
moreover, beyond money's worth. We live better than I care about
living, and so well that Julian dreads the return to the simple fare
of the Wayside. The vicinity is very beautiful--insomuch that if I had
seen it sooner, I doubt whether I should have built my tower in
Concord--but somewhere among these noble woods of white pine and near
these rocks and beaches. In fact, were it not for the neighborhood of
the railway, the site of this little black house would be an excellent
one; for the wood is within half a minute's walk, and the shore may be
reached in ten minutes. Well;--our sleeping accommodations are
poor;--that is not to [be] denied, but leaving out that matter, we
have nothing to complain of--except the heat, which would have
pervaded any abode, unless it were an Italian palace.

Mrs. Dana (the elder poet's wife, I believe) called here in a barouche
the other day, while Julian and I were out, to see Una, whom she
sup[posed] to be stopping here? She had two or three young ladies with
her, and would probably have asked Una to make a visit at their villa.

Elizabeth came to see us, Tuesday afternoon, and brought some more
books. I proposed that she should take advantage of our escort to
Concord; but she says she cannot be ready before the first week of
September.

It is time we were gone from hence; for everybody seems to have found
us out, and Julian says the boys shout at him from the cliffs, crying
"Mr. Hawthorne! Mr. Hawthorne!!" I don't know whether they mistake him
for his father, or pay him these courteous attentions on his own
account.

You may await tea for us on Saturday--unless the old people chance to
be very hungry.

     With utmost love,
     N. H.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE

(Letter 50--written by Julian Hawthorne, and continued by N. H.; no
date or superscription.)


Willy has been making a topmast for his ship, but by the way I have
forgot about his ship. He made it and it is 29 inches long, and about
three tuns. He has made a beautiful solid balance for it and he says
it looks just like a real ship he has made or is going to make

     _Dearest Wife_,

Julian did not finish his letter; but I suppose thou wilt be glad to
receive it, such as it is. It rains again most horribly to-day; so
that I have been obliged to leave him at home, where he finds society
enough and the greatest kindness. I believe I told you, in one of my
former letters, that he has quite left off hunching his shoulders. He
has complained of the headache, now and then, but not often; and Dr.
Dryasdust has promised to take him in hand, and entirely refit
him--that is, if he prove to be out of repair.

Do not forget to tell me whether Mr. Westen's coal-bill was paid.

I hoped to have received letters from thee by the Cintra, which
arrived here day before yesterday, having left Lisbon on the 15th. She
reports the Madrid as having arrived on the Friday after sailing. I
long to know whether thy cough yet begins to be benefitted by the
sunshine, and whether thou findest again the elasticity of frame and
spirit, which thou leftest behind in America. Since thou hast
departed, I sometimes feel a strange yearning for the Wayside, and
wish that our wanderings were over, and all of us happy together in
that wretched old house.

     THINE OWN OWNEST.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     Continental Hotel, _Philadelphia_, March 9th, '62

     _Dearest Wife_,

Wishing to spend a little while in New York, we did not leave there
till 2 o'clock, yesterday, and so are not yet in Washington. I had a
pleasant time in New York, and went on Friday evening, by invitation,
to the Century Club, where I met various artists and literary people.
The next forenoon, Ticknor strolled round among his acquaintances,
taking me with him. Nothing remarkable happened, save that my poor old
bedevilled phizmahogany was seized upon and photographed for a
stereoscope; and as far as I could judge from the negative, it
threatens to be fearfully like.

The weather here is very warm and pleasant; there are no traces of
snow and it seems like the latter end of April. I feel perfectly well,
and have a great appetite. The farther we go, the deeper grows the
rumble and grumble of the coming storm, and I think the two armies
are only waiting our arrival to begin.

We expect to leave Philadelphia at 8Â¼ tomorrow morning, and shall
reach Washington at 6 o'clock P.M. It I have an opportunity, I shall
send off Una's note the same evening, but cannot tell how.




TO MRS. HAWTHORNE


     [9th May, 1863, _Concord_]

     _Dearest Wife_,

I have been particularly well yesterday and to-day. You must
particularly thank Mr. Fields for the two volumes of the magazine. The
article about Lichfield and Uttoxeter is done; and I shall set about
the remaining article for the magazine in a day or two, and probably
get it finished by the end of the month, since it will not be
necessary to hurry. I shall call it "Civic Banquets," and I suppose it
will be the concluding article of the volume.

I want a new hat, my present one being too shabby to wear anywhere but
at home; and as Mr. Fields is all made up of kindness, I thought he
might be kind enough to get me one at his hatter's. I have measured my
old hat round outside of the hatband, and it is about 24 inches;
inside, it measures 7 inches one way, and a little more than 8 the
other, and is hardly large enough. Get the largest hat possible;
color black, a broad brimmed slouch.

Thank Rose for her kind letter.

     YOUR SPOUSE.

     (On the reverse side of the foregoing letter appears the
     following, written by Una)

All Rose's side of the hawthorn is covered with buds, and my wild
violets are rampant. I water your hawthorn branches every morning, and
as yet they have showed no signs of fading, though Papa, with his
usual hopefulness, declares they will. We found today on the hill a
lonely violet, the first of that sisterhood.

Julian appears well and jolly, but yesterday we were all killed by
eating newly-dug horse-radish, which was as pungent as a constellation
of stars. Papa stamped and kicked, and melted into tears, and said he
enjoyed it intensely, and I bore equal tortures more quietly; the
impregnable Julian being entirely unaffected by it, laughed
immoderately at us both.

Papa wants me to leave a place for him, so good-bye.

     Your loving daughter,

     UNA HAWTHORNE.

